# Argo (oceanography)

Argo is an international programme for researching the ocean. It uses profiling floats to observe temperature, salinity and currents. Recently it has observed bio-optical properties in the Earth's oceans. It has been operating since the early 2000s. The real-time data it provides support climate and oceanographic research. A special research interest is to quantify the ocean heat content (OHC). The Argo fleet consists of almost 4000 drifting "Argo floats" (as profiling floats used by the Argo program are often called) deployed worldwide. Each float weighs 20–30 kg. In most cases probes drift at a depth of 1000 metres. Experts call this the parking depth. Every 10 days, by changing their buoyancy, they dive to a depth of 2000 metres and then move to the sea-surface. As they move they measure conductivity and temperature profiles as well as pressure. Scientists calculate salinity and density from these measurements. Seawater density is important in determining large-scale motions in the ocean.
Average current velocities at 1000 metres are directly measured by the distance and direction a float drifts while parked at that depth, which is determined by GPS or Argos system positions at the surface. The data is transmitted to shore via satellite, and is freely available to everyone, without restrictions.
The Argo program is named after the Greek mythical ship Argo to emphasize the complementary relationship of Argo with the Jason satellite altimeters. Both the standard Argo floats and the 4 satellites launched so far to monitor changing sea-level all operate on a 10-day duty cycle.

International collaboration
The Argo program is a collaborative partnership of more than 30 nations from all continents (most shown on the graphic map in this article) that maintains a global array and provides a dataset anyone can use to explore the ocean environment. Argo is a component of the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS), and is coordinated by the Argo Steering Team, an international body of scientists and technical experts that meets once per year.  The Argo data stream is managed by the Argo Data Management Team.  Argo is also supported by the Group on Earth Observations, and has been endorsed since its beginnings by the World Climate Research Programme's CLIVAR Project (Variability and predictability of the ocean-atmosphere system), and by the Global Ocean Data Assimilation Experiment (GODAE OceanView).

History
A program called Argo was first proposed at OceanObs 1999 which was a conference organised by international agencies with the aim of creating a coordinated approach to ocean observations.  The original Argo prospectus was created by a small group of scientists, chaired by Dean Roemmich, who described a program that would have a global array of about 3000 floats in place by sometime in 2007. The 3000-float array was achieved in November 2007 and was global.  The Argo Steering Team met for the first time in 1999 in Maryland (USA) and outlined the principles of global data sharing.  
The Argo Steering Team made a 10-year report to OceanObs-2009  and received suggestions on how the array might be improved.  These suggestions included enhancing the array at high latitudes, in marginal seas (such as the Gulf of Mexico and the Mediterranean) and along the equator, improved observation of strong boundary currents (such as the Gulf Stream and Kuroshio), extension of observations into deep water and the addition of sensors for monitoring biological and chemical changes in the oceans.  In November 2012 an Indian float in the Argo array gathered the one-millionth profile (twice the number collected by research vessels during all of the 20th century) an event that was reported in several press releases. As can be seen in the plot opposite, by early 2018 the Bio-Argo program is expanding rapidly.

Float design and operation
The critical capability of an Argo float is its ability to rise and descend in the ocean on a programmed schedule. The floats do this by changing their effective density. The density of any object is given by its mass divided by its volume. The Argo float keeps its mass constant, but by altering its volume, it changes its density. To do this, mineral oil is forced out of the float's pressure case and expands a rubber bladder at the bottom end of the float. As the bladder expands, the float becomes less dense than seawater and rises to the surface. Upon finishing its tasks at the surface, the float withdraws the oil and descends again.
A handful of companies and organizations manufacture profiling floats used in the Argo program.  APEX floats, made by Teledyne Webb Research, are the most common element of the current array. SOLO and SOLO-II floats (the latter use a reciprocating pump for buoyancy changes, unlike screw-driven pistons in other floats) were developed at Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Other types include the NINJA float, made by the Tsurumi Seiki Co. of Japan, and the ARVOR, DEEP-ARVOR & PROVOR floats developed by IFREMER in France, in industrial partnership with French Company nke instrumentation.  Most floats use sensors made by Sea-Bird Scientific (
, which also makes a profiling float called Navis. A typical Argo float is a cylinder just over 1 metre long and 14 cm across with a hemispherical cap.  Thus it has a minimum volume of about 16,600 cubic centimetres (cm3).  At Ocean Station Papa in the Gulf of Alaska the temperature and salinity at the surface might be about 6°C and 32.55 parts per thousand giving a density of sea-water of 1.0256 g/cm3.  At a depth of 2000 metres (pressure of 2000 decibars) the temperature might be 2°C and the salinity 34.58 parts per thousand.  Thus, including the effect of pressure (water is slightly compressible) the density of sea-water is about 1.0369 g/cm3.  The change in density divided by the deep density is 0.0109.
The float has to match these densities if it is to reach 2000 metres depth and then rise to the surface.  Since the density of the float is its mass divided by volume, it needs to change its volume by 0.0109 × 16,600 = 181 cm3 to drive that excursion; a small amount of that volume change is provided by the compressibility of the float itself, and excess buoyancy is required at the surface in order to keep the antenna above water.  All Argo floats carry sensors to measure the temperature and salinity of the ocean as they vary with depth, but an increasing number of floats also carry other sensors, such as for measuring dissolved oxygen and ultimately other variables of biological and chemical interest such as chlorophyll, nutrients and pH.  An extension to the Argo project called BioArgo is being developed and, when implemented, will add a biological and chemical component to this method of sampling the oceans.
The antenna for satellite data collection is mounted at the top of the float which extends clear of the sea surface after it completes its ascent. The ocean is saline, hence an electrical conductor, so that radio communications from under the sea surface are not possible.  Early in the program Argo floats exclusively used slow mono-directional satellite communications but the majority of floats being deployed in mid-2013 use rapid bi-directional communications.  The result of this is that Argo floats now transmit much more data than was previously possible and they spend only about 20 minutes on the sea surface rather than 8–12 hours, greatly reducing problems such as grounding and bio-fouling.
The average life span of Argo floats has increased greatly since the program began, first exceeding 4-year mean lifetime for floats deployed in 2005. Ongoing improvements should result in further extensions to 6 years and longer.
As of June 2014, new types of floats were being tested to collect measurements much deeper than can be reached by standard Argo floats. These "Deep Argo" floats are designed to reach depths of 4000 or 6000 metres, versus 2000 metres for standard floats. This will allow a much greater volume of the ocean to be sampled. Such measurements are important for developing a comprehensive understanding of the ocean, such as trends in heat content.

Array design
The original plan advertised in the Argo prospectus called for a nearest-neighbour distance between floats, on average, of 3° latitude by 3° longitude. This allowed for higher resolution (in kilometres) at high latitudes, both north and south, and was considered necessary because of the decrease in the Rossby radius of deformation which governs the scale of oceanographic features, such as eddies.  By 2007 this was largely achieved, but the target resolution has never yet been completely achieved in the deep southern ocean.
Efforts are being made to complete the original plan in all parts of the world oceans but this is difficult in the deep Southern Ocean as deployment opportunities occur only very rarely.
As mentioned in the history section, enhancements are now planned in the equatorial regions of the oceans, in boundary currents and in marginal seas.  This requires that the total number of floats be increased from the original plan of 3000 floats to a 4000-float array.
One consequence of the use of profiling floats to sample the ocean is that seasonal bias can be removed.  The diagram opposite shows the count of all float profiles acquired each month by Argo south of 30°S (upper curve) from the start of the program to November 2012 compared with the same diagram for all other data available.  The lower curve shows a strong annual bias with four times as many profiles being collected in austral summer than in austral winter.  For the upper (Argo) plot, there is no bias apparent.

Data access
One of the critical features of the Argo model is that of global and unrestricted access to data in near real-time.  When a float transmits a profile it is quickly converted to a format that can be inserted on the Global Telecommunications System (GTS).  The GTS is operated by the World Meteorological Organisation, or WMO, specifically for the purpose of sharing data needed for weather forecasting.  Thus all nations who are members of the WMO receive all Argo profiles within a few hours of the acquisition of the profile.  Data are also made available through ftp and WWW access via two Argo Global Data Centres (or GDACs), one in France and one in the US.
About 90% of all profiles acquired are made available to global access within 24 hours, with the remaining profiles becoming available soon thereafter.
For a researcher to use data acquired via the GTS or from the Argo Global Data Centres (GDACs) does require programming skills.  The GDACs supply multi-profile files that are a native file format for Ocean DataView.  For any day there are files with names like 20121106_prof.nc that are called multi-profile files.  This example is a file specific to 6 November 2012 and contains all profiles in a single NetCDF file for one ocean basin.  The GDACs identify three ocean basins, Atlantic, Indian and Pacific.  Thus three multi-profile files will carry every Argo profile acquired on that specific day.
A user who wants to explore Argo data but lacks programming skills might like to download the Argo Global Marine Atlas
 which is an easy-to-use utility that allows the creation of products based on Argo data such as the salinity section shown above, but also horizontal maps of ocean properties, time series at any location etc.  This Atlas also carries an "update" button that allows data to be updated periodically.  The Argo Global Marine Atlas is maintained at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, California.
Argo data can also be displayed in Google Earth with a layer developed by the Argo Technical Coordinator.

Data results
Argo is now the dominant source of information about the climatic state of the oceans and is being widely used in many publications as seen in the diagram opposite. Topics addressed include air-sea interaction, ocean currents, interannual variability, El Niño, mesoscale eddies, water mass properties and transformation. Argo is also now permitting direct computations of the global ocean heat content.
They determine that areas of the world with high surface salinity are getting saltier and areas of the world with relatively low surface salinity are getting fresher.  This has been described as 'the rich get richer and the poor get poorer'.  Scientifically speaking, the distributions of salt are governed by the difference between precipitation and evaporation.  Areas, such as the northern North Pacific Ocean, where precipitation dominates evaporation are fresher than average.  The implication of their result is that the Earth is seeing an intensification of the global hydrological cycle.  Argo data are also being used to drive computer models of the climate system leading to improvements in the ability of nations to forecast seasonal climate variations.
Argo data were critical in the drafting of Chapter 3 (Working Group 1) of the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (released September 2013) and an appendix was added to that chapter to emphasize the profound change that had taken place in the quality and volume of ocean data since the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report and the resulting improvement in confidence in the description of surface salinity changes and upper-ocean heat content.
Argo data were used along with sea level change data from satellite altimetry in a new approach to analyzing global warming, reported in Eos in 2017. David Morrison reports that "[b]oth of these data sets show clear signatures of heat deposition in the ocean, from the temperature changes in the top 2 km of water and from the expansion of the ocean water due to heating. These two measures are less noisy than land and atmospheric temperatures."
Argo and CERES data collected between 2005 and 2019 have been compared as independent measures of the global change in Earth's energy imbalance.   Both data sets showed similar behavior at annualized resolution,  as well as a doubling of the linear trend in planet's heating rate during that 14-year span.

================================================================================

# Abyssal fan

Abyssal fans, also known as deep-sea fans, underwater deltas, and submarine fans, are underwater geological structures associated with large-scale sediment deposition and formed by turbidity currents.   They can be thought of as an underwater version of alluvial fans and can vary dramatically in size, with widths from several kilometres to several thousands of kilometres. The largest is the Bengal Fan, followed by the Indus Fan, but major fans are also found at the outlet of the Amazon, Congo, Mississippi and elsewhere.

Formation
Abyssal (or submarine) fans are formed from turbidity currents.
These currents begin when a geologic activity pushes sediments over the edge of a continental shelf and down the continental slope, creating an underwater landslide.  A dense slurry of muds and sands speeds towards the foot of the slope, until the current slows.  The decreasing current, having a reduced ability to transport sediments, deposits the grains it carries, thus creating a submarine fan.  The slurry continues to slow as it is moved towards the continental rise until it reaches the ocean bed.  Thus results a series of graded sediments of sand, silt and mud, which are known as turbidites, as described by the Bouma sequence.

================================================================================

# Abyssal plain

An abyssal plain is an underwater plain on the deep ocean floor, usually found at depths between 3,000 and 6,000 metres (9,800 and 19,700 ft). Lying generally between the foot of a continental rise and a mid-ocean ridge, abyssal plains cover more than 50% of the Earth's surface. They are among the flattest, smoothest, and least explored regions on Earth. Abyssal plains are key geologic elements of oceanic basins, the other elements being an elevated mid-ocean ridge and flanking abyssal hills.
The creation of the abyssal plain is the result of the spreading of the seafloor (plate tectonics) and the melting of the lower oceanic crust. Magma rises from above the asthenosphere (a layer of the upper mantle), and as this basaltic material reaches the surface at mid-ocean ridges, it forms new oceanic crust, which is constantly pulled sideways by spreading of the seafloor. Abyssal plains result from the blanketing of an originally uneven surface of oceanic crust by fine-grained sediments, mainly clay and silt. Much of this sediment is deposited by turbidity currents that have been channelled from the continental margins along submarine canyons into deeper water. The rest is composed chiefly of pelagic sediments. Metallic nodules are common in some areas of the plains, with varying concentrations of metals, including manganese, iron, nickel, cobalt, and copper. There are also amounts of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and silicon, due to material that comes down and decomposes.
Owing in part to their vast size, abyssal plains are believed to be major reservoirs of biodiversity. They also exert significant influence upon ocean carbon cycling, dissolution of calcium carbonate, and atmospheric CO2 concentrations over time scales of a hundred to a thousand years. The structure of abyssal ecosystems is strongly influenced by the rate of flux of food to the seafloor and the composition of the material that settles. Factors such as climate change, fishing practices, and ocean fertilization have a substantial effect on patterns of primary production in the euphotic zone. Animals absorb dissolved oxygen from the oxygen-poor waters. Much dissolved oxygen in abyssal plains came from polar regions that had melted long ago. Due to scarcity of oxygen, abyssal plains are inhospitable for organisms that would flourish in the oxygen-enriched waters above. Deep sea coral reefs are mainly found in depths of 3,000 meters and deeper in the abyssal and hadal zones.
Abyssal plains were not recognized as distinct physiographic features of the sea floor until the late 1940s and, until recently, none had been studied on a systematic basis. They are poorly preserved in the sedimentary record, because they tend to be consumed by the subduction process. Due to darkness and a water pressure that can reach about 750 times atmospheric pressure (76 megapascal), abyssal plains are not well explored.

Oceanic zones
The ocean can be conceptualized as zones, depending on depth, and presence or absence of sunlight. Nearly all life forms in the ocean depend on the photosynthetic activities of phytoplankton and other marine plants to convert carbon dioxide into organic carbon, which is the basic building block of organic matter. Photosynthesis in turn requires energy from sunlight to drive the chemical reactions that produce organic carbon.
The stratum of the water column nearest the surface of the ocean (sea level) is referred to as the photic zone. The photic zone can be subdivided into two different vertical regions. The uppermost portion of the photic zone, where there is adequate light to support photosynthesis by phytoplankton and plants, is referred to as the euphotic zone (also referred to as the epipelagic zone, or surface zone). The lower portion of the photic zone, where the light intensity is insufficient for photosynthesis, is called the dysphotic zone (dysphotic means "poorly lit" in Greek). The dysphotic zone is also referred to as the mesopelagic zone, or the twilight zone. Its lowermost boundary is at a thermocline of 12 °C (54 °F), which, in the tropics generally lies between 200 and 1,000 metres.
The euphotic zone is somewhat arbitrarily defined as extending from the surface to the depth where the light intensity is approximately 0.1–1% of surface sunlight irradiance, depending on season, latitude and degree of water turbidity. In the clearest ocean water, the euphotic zone may extend to a depth of about 150 metres, or rarely, up to 200 metres. Dissolved substances and solid particles absorb and scatter light, and in coastal regions the high concentration of these substances causes light to be attenuated rapidly with depth. In such areas the euphotic zone may be only a few tens of metres deep or less. The dysphotic zone, where light intensity is considerably less than 1% of surface irradiance, extends from the base of the euphotic zone to about 1,000 metres. Extending from the bottom of the photic zone down to the seabed is the aphotic zone, a region of perpetual darkness.
Since the average depth of the ocean is about 4,300 metres, the photic zone represents only a tiny fraction of the ocean's total volume. However, due to its capacity for photosynthesis, the photic zone has the greatest biodiversity and biomass of all oceanic zones. Nearly all primary production in the ocean occurs here. Life forms which inhabit the aphotic zone are often capable of movement upwards through the water column into the photic zone for feeding. Otherwise, they must rely on material sinking from above, or find another source of energy and nutrition, such as occurs in chemosynthetic archaea found near hydrothermal vents and cold seeps.
The aphotic zone can be subdivided into three different vertical regions, based on depth and temperature. First is the bathyal zone, extending from a depth of 1,000 metres down to 3,000 metres, with water temperature decreasing from 12 °C (54 °F) to 4 °C (39 °F) as depth increases. Next is the abyssal zone, extending from a depth of 3,000 metres down to 6,000 metres. The final zone includes the deep oceanic trenches, and is known as the hadal zone. This, the deepest oceanic zone, extends from a depth of 6,000 metres down to approximately 11,034 meters, at the very bottom of the Mariana Trench, the deepest point on planet Earth. Abyssal plains are typically in the abyssal zone, at depths from 3,000 to 6,000 metres.
The table below illustrates the classification of oceanic zones:

Formation
Oceanic crust, which forms the bedrock of abyssal plains, is continuously being created at mid-ocean ridges (a type of divergent boundary) by a process known as decompression melting. Plume-related decompression melting of solid mantle is responsible for creating ocean islands like the Hawaiian islands, as well as the ocean crust at mid-ocean ridges. This phenomenon is also the most common explanation for flood basalts and oceanic plateaus (two types of large igneous provinces). Decompression melting occurs when the upper mantle is partially melted into magma as it moves upwards under mid-ocean ridges. This upwelling magma then cools and solidifies by conduction and convection of heat to form new oceanic crust. Accretion occurs as mantle is added to the growing edges of a tectonic plate, usually associated with seafloor spreading. The age of oceanic crust is therefore a function of distance from the mid-ocean ridge. The youngest oceanic crust is at the mid-ocean ridges, and it becomes progressively older, cooler and denser as it migrates outwards from the mid-ocean ridges as part of the process called mantle convection.
The lithosphere, which rides atop the asthenosphere, is divided into a number of tectonic plates that are continuously being created and consumed at their opposite plate boundaries. Oceanic crust and tectonic plates are formed and move apart at mid-ocean ridges. Abyssal hills are formed by stretching of the oceanic lithosphere. Consumption or destruction of the oceanic lithosphere occurs at oceanic trenches (a type of convergent boundary, also known as a destructive plate boundary) by a process known as subduction. Oceanic trenches are found at places where the oceanic lithospheric slabs of two different plates meet, and the denser (older) slab begins to descend back into the mantle. At the consumption edge of the plate (the oceanic trench), the oceanic lithosphere has thermally contracted to become quite dense, and it sinks under its own weight in the process of subduction. The subduction process consumes older oceanic lithosphere, so oceanic crust is seldom more than 200 million years old. The overall process of repeated cycles of creation and destruction of oceanic crust is known as the Supercontinent cycle, first proposed by Canadian geophysicist and geologist John Tuzo Wilson.
New oceanic crust, closest to the mid-oceanic ridges, is mostly basalt at shallow levels and has a rugged topography. The roughness of this topography is a function of the rate at which the mid-ocean ridge is spreading (the spreading rate). Magnitudes of spreading rates vary quite significantly. Typical values for fast-spreading ridges are greater than 100 mm/yr, while slow-spreading ridges are typically less than 20 mm/yr. Studies have shown that the slower the spreading rate, the rougher the new oceanic crust will be, and vice versa. It is thought this phenomenon is due to faulting at the mid-ocean ridge when the new oceanic crust was formed. These faults pervading the oceanic crust, along with their bounding abyssal hills, are the most common tectonic and topographic features on the surface of the Earth. The process of seafloor spreading helps to explain the concept of continental drift in the theory of plate tectonics.
The flat appearance of mature abyssal plains results from the blanketing of this originally uneven surface of oceanic crust by fine-grained sediments, mainly clay and silt. Much of this sediment is deposited from turbidity currents that have been channeled from the continental margins along submarine canyons down into deeper water. The remainder of the sediment comprises chiefly dust (clay particles) blown out to sea from land, and the remains of small marine plants and animals which sink from the upper layer of the ocean, known as pelagic sediments. The total sediment deposition rate in remote areas is estimated at two to three centimeters per thousand years. Sediment-covered abyssal plains are less common in the Pacific Ocean than in other major ocean basins because sediments from turbidity currents are trapped in oceanic trenches that border the Pacific Ocean.
Abyssal plains are typically covered by deep sea, but during parts of the Messinian salinity crisis much of the Mediterranean Sea's abyssal plain was exposed to air as an empty deep hot dry salt-floored sink.

Discovery
The landmark scientific expedition (December 1872 – May 1876) of the British Royal Navy survey ship HMS Challenger yielded a tremendous amount of bathymetric data, much of which has been confirmed by subsequent researchers. Bathymetric data obtained during the course of the Challenger expedition enabled scientists to draw maps, which provided a rough outline of certain major submarine terrain features, such as the edge of the continental shelves and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. This discontinuous set of data points was obtained by the simple technique of taking soundings by lowering long lines from the ship to the seabed.
The Challenger expedition was followed by the 1879–1881 expedition of the Jeannette, led by United States Navy Lieutenant George Washington DeLong. The team sailed across the Chukchi Sea and recorded meteorological and astronomical data in addition to taking soundings of the seabed. The ship became trapped in the ice pack near Wrangel Island in September 1879, and was ultimately crushed and sunk in June 1881.
The Jeannette expedition was followed by the 1893–1896 Arctic expedition of Norwegian explorer Fridtjof Nansen aboard the Fram, which proved that the Arctic Ocean was a deep oceanic basin, uninterrupted by any significant land masses north of the Eurasian continent.

Beginning in 1916, Canadian physicist Robert William Boyle and other scientists of the Anti-Submarine Detection Investigation Committee (ASDIC) undertook research which ultimately led to the development of sonar technology. Acoustic sounding equipment was developed which could be operated much more rapidly than the sounding lines, thus enabling the German Meteor expedition aboard the German research vessel Meteor (1925–27) to take frequent soundings on east-west Atlantic transects. Maps produced from these techniques show the major Atlantic basins, but the depth precision of these early instruments was not sufficient to reveal the flat featureless abyssal plains.
As technology improved, measurement of depth, latitude and longitude became more precise and it became possible to collect more or less continuous sets of data points. This allowed researchers to draw accurate and detailed maps of large areas of the ocean floor. Use of a continuously recording fathometer enabled Tolstoy & Ewing in the summer of 1947 to identify and describe the first abyssal plain. This plain, south of Newfoundland, is now known as the Sohm Abyssal Plain. Following this discovery many other examples were found in all the oceans.
The Challenger Deep is the deepest surveyed point of all of Earth's oceans; it is at the south end of the Mariana Trench near the Mariana Islands group. The depression is named after HMS Challenger, whose researchers made the first recordings of its depth on 23 March 1875 at station 225. The reported depth was 4,475 fathoms (8184 meters) based on two separate soundings. On 1 June 2009, sonar mapping of the Challenger Deep by the Simrad EM120 multibeam sonar bathymetry system aboard the R/V Kilo Moana indicated a maximum depth of 10971 meters (6.82 miles). The sonar system uses phase and amplitude bottom detection, with an accuracy of better than 0.2% of water depth (this is an error of about 22 meters at this depth).

Terrain features
Hydrothermal vents
A rare but important terrain feature found in the bathyal, abyssal and hadal zones is the hydrothermal vent. In contrast to the approximately 2 °C ambient water temperature at these depths, water emerges from these vents at temperatures ranging from 60 °C up to as high as 464 °C. Due to the high barometric pressure at these depths, water may exist in either its liquid form or as a supercritical fluid at such temperatures.
At a barometric pressure of 218 atmospheres, the critical point of water is 375 °C. At a depth of 3,000 meters, the barometric pressure of sea water is more than 300 atmospheres (as salt water is denser than fresh water). At this depth and pressure, seawater becomes supercritical at a temperature of 407 °C (see image). However the increase in salinity at this depth pushes the water closer to its critical point. Thus, water emerging from the hottest parts of some hydrothermal vents, black smokers and submarine volcanoes can be a supercritical fluid, possessing physical properties between those of a gas and those of a liquid.
Sister Peak (Comfortless Cove Hydrothermal Field, 4°48′S 12°22′W, elevation −2996 m), Shrimp Farm and Mephisto (Red Lion Hydrothermal Field, 4°48′S 12°23′W, elevation −3047 m), are three hydrothermal vents of the black smoker category, on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge near Ascension Island. They are presumed to have been active since an earthquake shook the region in 2002. These vents have been observed to vent phase-separated, vapor-type fluids. In 2008, sustained exit temperatures of up to 407 °C were recorded at one of these vents, with a peak recorded temperature of up to 464 °C. These thermodynamic conditions exceed the critical point of seawater, and are the highest temperatures recorded to date from the seafloor. This is the first reported evidence for direct magmatic-hydrothermal interaction on a slow-spreading mid-ocean ridge. The initial stages of a vent chimney begin with the deposition of the mineral anhydrite. Sulfides of copper, iron, and zinc then precipitate in the chimney gaps, making it less porous over the course of time. Vent growths on the order of 30 cm (1 ft) per day have been recorded.  An April 2007 exploration of the deep-sea vents off the coast of Fiji found those vents to be a significant source of dissolved iron (see iron cycle).
Hydrothermal vents in the deep ocean typically form along the mid-ocean ridges, such as the East Pacific Rise and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. These are locations where two tectonic plates are diverging and new crust is being formed.

Cold seeps
Another unusual feature found in the abyssal and hadal zones is the cold seep, sometimes called a cold vent. This is an area of the seabed where seepage of hydrogen sulfide, methane and other hydrocarbon-rich fluid occurs, often in the form of a deep-sea brine pool. The first cold seeps were discovered in 1983, at a depth of 3200 meters in the Gulf of Mexico. Since then, cold seeps have been discovered in many other areas of the World Ocean, including the Monterey Submarine Canyon just off Monterey Bay, California, the Sea of Japan, off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica, off the Atlantic coast of Africa, off the coast of Alaska, and under an ice shelf in Antarctica.

Biodiversity
Though the plains were once assumed to be vast, desert-like habitats, research over the past decade or so shows that they teem with a wide variety of microbial life. However, ecosystem structure and function at the deep seafloor have historically been poorly studied because of the size and remoteness of the abyss. Recent oceanographic expeditions conducted by an international group of scientists from the Census of Diversity of Abyssal Marine Life (CeDAMar) have found an extremely high level of biodiversity on abyssal plains, with up to 2000 species of bacteria, 250 species of protozoans, and 500 species of invertebrates (worms, crustaceans and molluscs), typically found at single abyssal sites. New species make up more than 80% of the thousands of seafloor invertebrate species collected at any abyssal station, highlighting our heretofore poor understanding of abyssal diversity and evolution. Richer biodiversity is associated with areas of known phytodetritus input and higher organic carbon flux.
Abyssobrotula galatheae, a species of cusk eel in the family Ophidiidae, is among the deepest-living species of fish. In 1970, one specimen was trawled from a depth of 8370 meters in the Puerto Rico Trench. The animal was dead, however, upon arrival at the surface. In 2008, the hadal snailfish (Pseudoliparis amblystomopsis) was observed and recorded at a depth of 7700 meters in the Japan Trench. In December 2014 a type of snailfish was filmed at a depth of 8145 meters, followed in May 2017 by another sailfish filmed at 8178 meters. These are, to date, the deepest living fish ever recorded. Other fish of the abyssal zone include the fishes of the family Ipnopidae, which includes the abyssal spiderfish (Bathypterois longipes), tripodfish (Bathypterois grallator), feeler fish (Bathypterois longifilis), and the black lizardfish (Bathysauropsis gracilis). Some members of this family have been recorded from depths of more than 6000 meters.
CeDAMar scientists have demonstrated that some abyssal and hadal species have a cosmopolitan distribution. One example of this would be protozoan foraminiferans, certain species of which are distributed from the Arctic to the Antarctic. Other faunal groups, such as the polychaete worms and isopod crustaceans, appear to be endemic to certain specific plains and basins. Many apparently unique taxa of nematode worms have also been recently discovered on abyssal plains. This suggests that the deep ocean has fostered adaptive radiations. The taxonomic composition of the nematode fauna in the abyssal Pacific is similar, but not identical to, that of the North Atlantic. A list of some of the species that have been discovered or redescribed by CeDAMar can be found here.
Eleven of the 31 described species of Monoplacophora (a class of mollusks) live below 2000 meters. Of these 11 species, two live exclusively in the hadal zone. The greatest number of monoplacophorans are from the eastern Pacific Ocean along the oceanic trenches. However, no abyssal monoplacophorans have yet been found in the Western Pacific and only one abyssal species has been identified in the Indian Ocean. Of the 922 known species of chitons (from the Polyplacophora class of mollusks), 22 species (2.4%) are reported to live below 2000 meters and two of them are restricted to the abyssal plain. Although genetic studies are lacking, at least six of these species are thought to be eurybathic (capable of living in a wide range of depths), having been reported as occurring from the sublittoral to abyssal depths. A large number of the polyplacophorans from great depths are herbivorous or xylophagous, which could explain the difference between the distribution of monoplacophorans and polyplacophorans in the world's oceans.
Peracarid crustaceans, including isopods, are known to form a significant part of the macrobenthic community that is responsible for scavenging on large food falls onto the sea floor. In 2000, scientists of the Diversity of the deep Atlantic benthos (DIVA 1) expedition (cruise M48/1 of the German research vessel RV Meteor III) discovered and collected three new species of the Asellota suborder of benthic isopods from the abyssal plains of the Angola Basin in the South Atlantic Ocean. In 2003, De Broyer et al. collected some 68,000 peracarid crustaceans from 62 species from baited traps deployed in the Weddell Sea, Scotia Sea, and off the South Shetland Islands. They found that about 98% of the specimens belonged to the amphipod superfamily Lysianassoidea, and 2% to the isopod family Cirolanidae. Half of these species were collected from depths of greater than 1000 meters.
In 2005, the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) remotely operated vehicle, KAIKO, collected sediment core from the Challenger Deep. 432 living specimens of soft-walled foraminifera were identified in the sediment samples. Foraminifera are single-celled protists that construct shells. There are an estimated 4,000 species of living foraminifera. Out of the 432 organisms collected, the overwhelming majority of the sample consisted of simple, soft-shelled foraminifera, with others representing species of the complex, multi-chambered genera Leptohalysis and Reophax. Overall, 85% of the specimens consisted of soft-shelled allogromiids. This is unusual compared to samples of sediment-dwelling organisms from other deep-sea environments, where the percentage of organic-walled foraminifera ranges from 5% to 20% of the total. Small organisms with hard calciferous shells have trouble growing at extreme depths because the water at that depth is severely lacking in calcium carbonate. The giant (5–20 cm) foraminifera known as xenophyophores are only found at depths of 500–10,000 metres, where they can occur in great numbers and greatly increase animal diversity due to their bioturbation and provision of living habitat for small animals.
While similar lifeforms have been known to exist in shallower oceanic trenches (>7,000 m) and on the abyssal plain, the lifeforms discovered in the Challenger Deep may represent independent taxa from those shallower ecosystems. This preponderance of soft-shelled organisms at the Challenger Deep may be a result of selection pressure. Millions of years ago, the Challenger Deep was shallower than it is now. Over the past six to nine million years, as the Challenger Deep grew to its present depth, many of the species present in the sediment of that ancient biosphere were unable to adapt to the increasing water pressure and changing environment. Those species that were able to adapt may have been the ancestors of the organisms currently endemic to the Challenger Deep.
Polychaetes occur throughout the Earth's oceans at all depths, from forms that live as plankton near the surface, to the deepest oceanic trenches. The robot ocean probe Nereus observed a 2–3 cm specimen (still unclassified) of polychaete at the bottom of the Challenger Deep on 31 May 2009. There are more than 10,000 described species of polychaetes; they can be found in nearly every marine environment. Some species live in the coldest ocean temperatures of the hadal zone, while others can be found in the extremely hot waters adjacent to hydrothermal vents.
Within the abyssal and hadal zones, the areas around submarine hydrothermal vents and cold seeps have by far the greatest biomass and biodiversity per unit area. Fueled by the chemicals dissolved in the vent fluids, these areas are often home to large and diverse communities of thermophilic, halophilic and other extremophilic prokaryotic microorganisms (such as those of the sulfide-oxidizing genus Beggiatoa), often arranged in large bacterial mats near cold seeps. In these locations, chemosynthetic archaea and bacteria typically form the base of the food chain. Although the process of chemosynthesis is entirely microbial, these chemosynthetic microorganisms often support vast ecosystems consisting of complex multicellular organisms through symbiosis. These communities are characterized by species such as vesicomyid clams, mytilid mussels, limpets, isopods, giant tube worms, soft corals, eelpouts, galatheid crabs, and alvinocarid shrimp. The deepest seep community discovered thus far is in the Japan Trench, at a depth of 7700 meters.
Probably the most important ecological characteristic of abyssal ecosystems is energy limitation. Abyssal seafloor communities are considered to be food limited because benthic production depends on the input of detrital organic material produced in the euphotic zone, thousands of meters above. Most of the organic flux arrives as an attenuated rain of small particles (typically, only 0.5–2% of net primary production in the euphotic zone), which decreases inversely with water depth. The small particle flux can be augmented by the fall of larger carcasses and downslope transport of organic material near continental margins.

Exploitation of resources
In addition to their high biodiversity, abyssal plains are of great current and future commercial and strategic interest. For example, they may be used for the legal and illegal disposal of large structures such as ships and oil rigs, radioactive waste and other hazardous waste, such as munitions. They may also be attractive sites for deep-sea fishing, and extraction of oil and gas and other minerals. Future deep-sea waste disposal activities that could be significant by 2025 include emplacement of sewage and sludge, carbon sequestration, and disposal of dredge spoils.
As fish stocks dwindle in the upper ocean, deep-sea fisheries are increasingly being targeted for exploitation. Because deep sea fish are long-lived and slow growing, these deep-sea fisheries are not thought to be sustainable in the long term given current management practices. Changes in primary production in the photic zone are expected to alter the standing stocks in the food-limited aphotic zone.
Hydrocarbon exploration in deep water occasionally results in significant environmental degradation resulting mainly from accumulation of contaminated drill cuttings, but also from oil spills. While the oil blowout involved in the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico originates from a wellhead only 1500 meters below the ocean surface, it nevertheless illustrates the kind of environmental disaster that can result from mishaps related to offshore drilling for oil and gas.
Sediments of certain abyssal plains contain abundant mineral resources, notably polymetallic nodules. These potato-sized concretions of manganese, iron, nickel, cobalt, and copper, distributed on the seafloor at depths of greater than 4000 meters, are of significant commercial interest. The area of maximum commercial interest for polymetallic nodule mining (called the Pacific nodule province) lies in international waters of the Pacific Ocean, stretching from 118°–157°, and from 9°–16°N, an area of more than 3 million km2. The abyssal Clarion-Clipperton fracture zone (CCFZ) is an area within the Pacific nodule province that is currently under exploration for its mineral potential.
Eight commercial contractors are currently licensed by the International Seabed Authority (an intergovernmental organization established to organize and control all mineral-related activities in the international seabed area beyond the limits of national jurisdiction) to explore nodule resources and to test mining techniques in eight claim areas, each covering 150,000 km2. When mining ultimately begins, each mining operation is projected to directly disrupt 300–800 km2 of seafloor per year and disturb the benthic fauna over an area 5–10 times that size due to redeposition of suspended sediments. Thus, over the 15-year projected duration of a single mining operation, nodule mining might severely damage abyssal seafloor communities over areas of 20,000 to 45,000 km2 (a zone at least the size of Massachusetts).
Limited knowledge of the taxonomy, biogeography and natural history of deep sea communities prevents accurate assessment of the risk of species extinctions from large-scale mining. Data acquired from the abyssal North Pacific and North Atlantic suggest that deep-sea ecosystems may be adversely affected by mining operations on decadal time scales. In 1978, a dredge aboard the Hughes Glomar Explorer, operated by the American mining consortium Ocean Minerals Company (OMCO), made a mining track at a depth of 5000 meters in the nodule fields of the CCFZ. In 2004, the French Research Institute for Exploitation of the Sea (IFREMER) conducted the Nodinaut expedition to this mining track (which is still visible on the seabed) to study the long-term effects of this physical disturbance on the sediment and its benthic fauna. Samples taken of the superficial sediment revealed that its physical and chemical properties had not shown any recovery since the disturbance made 26 years earlier. On the other hand, the biological activity measured in the track by instruments aboard the crewed submersible bathyscaphe Nautile did not differ from a nearby unperturbed site. This data suggests that the benthic fauna and nutrient fluxes at the water–sediment interface has fully recovered.

List of abyssal plains
See also
List of oceanic landforms
List of submarine topographical features
Oceanic ridge
Physical oceanography

References
Bibliography
External links
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (3 November 2009). "Deep-sea Ecosystems Affected By Climate Change". ScienceDaily. Retrieved 18 June 2010.

================================================================================

# Acoustical oceanography

Underwater acoustics (also known as hydroacoustics) is the study of the propagation of sound in water and the interaction of the mechanical waves that constitute sound with the water, its contents and its boundaries. The water may be in the ocean, a lake, a river or a tank. Typical frequencies associated with underwater acoustics are between 10 Hz and 1 MHz.  The propagation of sound in the ocean at frequencies lower than 10 Hz is usually not possible without penetrating deep into the seabed, whereas frequencies above 1 MHz are rarely used because they are absorbed very quickly.
Hydroacoustics, using sonar technology, is most commonly used for monitoring of underwater physical and biological characteristics. Hydroacoustics can be used to detect the depth of a water body (bathymetry), as well as the presence or absence, abundance, distribution, size, and behavior of underwater plants and animals.  Hydroacoustic sensing involves "passive acoustics" (listening for sounds) or active acoustics making a sound and listening for the echo, hence the common name for the device, echo sounder or echosounder.
There are a number of different causes of noise from shipping. These can be subdivided into those caused by the propeller, those caused by machinery, and those caused by the movement of the hull through the water. The relative importance of these three different categories will depend, amongst other things, on the ship type.
One of the main causes of hydro acoustic noise from fully submerged lifting surfaces is the unsteady separated turbulent flow near the surface's trailing edge that produces pressure fluctuations on the surface and unsteady oscillatory flow in the near wake. The relative motion between the surface and the ocean creates a turbulent boundary layer (TBL) that surrounds the surface. The noise is generated by the fluctuating velocity and pressure fields within this TBL.
The field of underwater acoustics is closely related to a number of other fields of acoustic study, including sonar, transduction, signal processing, acoustical oceanography, bioacoustics, and physical acoustics.

History
Underwater sound has probably been used by marine animals for millions of years. The science of underwater acoustics began in 1490, when Leonardo da Vinci wrote the following,

"If you cause your ship to stop and place the head of a long tube in the water and place the outer extremity to your ear, you will hear ships at a great distance from you."
In 1687 Isaac Newton wrote his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy which included the first mathematical treatment of sound. The next major step in the development of underwater acoustics was made by Daniel Colladon, a Swiss physicist, and Charles Sturm, a French mathematician. In 1826, on Lake Geneva, they measured the elapsed time between a flash of light and the sound of a submerged ship's bell heard using an underwater listening horn. They measured a sound speed of 1435 metres per second over a 17 kilometre (km) distance, providing the first quantitative measurement of sound speed in water. The result they obtained was within about 2% of currently accepted values. In 1877 Lord Rayleigh wrote the Theory of Sound and established modern acoustic theory.
The sinking of Titanic in 1912 and the start of World War I provided the impetus for the next wave of progress in underwater acoustics. Systems for detecting icebergs and U-boats were developed. Between 1912 and 1914, a number of echolocation patents were granted in  Europe and the U.S., culminating in Reginald A. Fessenden's echo-ranger in 1914. Pioneering work was carried out during this time in France by Paul Langevin and in Britain by A B Wood and associates. The development of both active ASDIC and passive sonar (SOund Navigation And Ranging) proceeded apace during the war, driven by the first large scale deployments of submarines. Other advances in underwater acoustics included the development of acoustic mines.
In 1919, the first scientific paper on underwater acoustics was published, theoretically describing the refraction of sound waves produced by temperature and salinity gradients in the ocean. The range predictions of the paper were experimentally validated by propagation loss measurements.
The next two decades saw the development of several applications of underwater acoustics. The fathometer, or depth sounder, was developed commercially during the 1920s. Originally natural materials were used for the transducers, but by the 1930s sonar systems incorporating piezoelectric transducers made from synthetic materials were being used for passive listening systems and for active echo-ranging systems. These systems were used to good effect  during World War II by both submarines and anti-submarine vessels.  Many advances in underwater acoustics were made which were summarised later in the series Physics of Sound in the Sea, published in 1946.
After World War II, the development of sonar systems was driven largely by the Cold War, resulting in advances in the theoretical and practical understanding of underwater acoustics, aided by computer-based techniques.

Theory
Sound waves in water, bottom of sea
A sound wave propagating underwater consists of alternating compressions and rarefactions of the water. These compressions and rarefactions are detected by a receiver, such as the human ear or a hydrophone, as changes in pressure.  These waves may be man-made or naturally generated.
At 1 kHz, the wavelength in water is about 1.5 m. Sometimes the term "sound velocity" is used but this is incorrect as the quantity is a scalar.
The large impedance contrast between air and water (the ratio is about 3600) and the scale of surface roughness means that the sea surface behaves as an almost perfect reflector of sound at frequencies below 1 kHz. Sound speed in water exceeds that in air by a factor of 4.4 and the density ratio is about 820.

Absorption of sound
Absorption of low frequency sound is weak.  (see Technical Guides – Calculation of absorption of sound in seawater for an on-line calculator).  The main cause of sound attenuation in fresh water, and at high frequency in sea water (above 100 kHz) is viscosity.  Important additional contributions at lower frequency in seawater are associated with the ionic relaxation of boric acid (up to c. 10 kHz) and magnesium sulfate (c. 10 kHz-100 kHz).
Sound may be absorbed by losses at the fluid boundaries. Near the surface of the sea losses can occur in a bubble layer or in ice, while at the bottom sound can penetrate into the sediment and be absorbed.

Sound reflection and scattering
Boundary interactions
Both the water surface and bottom are reflecting and scattering boundaries.

Surface
For many purposes the sea-air surface can be thought of as a perfect reflector.  The impedance contrast is so great that little energy is able to cross this boundary.  Acoustic pressure waves reflected from the sea surface experience a reversal in phase, often stated as either a "pi phase change" or a "180 deg phase change".  This is represented mathematically by assigning a reflection coefficient of minus 1 instead of plus one to the sea surface.
At high frequency (above about 1 kHz) or when the sea is rough, some of the incident sound is scattered, and this is taken into account by assigning a reflection coefficient whose magnitude is less than one.  For example, close to normal incidence, the reflection coefficient becomes 
, where h is the rms wave height.
A further complication is the presence of wind-generated bubbles or fish close to the sea surface.  The bubbles can also form plumes that absorb some of the incident and scattered sound, and scatter some of the sound themselves.

Seabed
The acoustic impedance mismatch between water and the bottom is generally much less than at the surface and is more complex. It depends on the bottom material types and depth of the layers. Theories have been developed for predicting the sound propagation in the bottom in this case, for example by Biot  and by Buckingham.

At target
The reflection of sound at a target whose dimensions are large compared with the acoustic wavelength depends on its size and shape as well as the impedance of the target relative to that of water. Formulae have been developed for the target strength of various simple shapes as a function of angle of sound incidence.  More complex shapes may be approximated by combining these simple ones.

Propagation of sound
Underwater acoustic propagation depends on many factors. The direction of sound propagation is determined by the sound speed gradients in the water. These speed gradients transform the sound wave through refraction, reflection, and dispersion. In the sea the vertical gradients are generally much larger than the horizontal ones. Combining this with a tendency towards increasing sound speed at increasing depth, due to the increasing pressure in the deep sea, causes a reversal of the sound speed gradient in the thermocline, creating an efficient waveguide at the depth, corresponding to the minimum sound speed. The sound speed profile may cause regions of low sound intensity called "Shadow Zones", and regions of high intensity called "Caustics".  These may be found by ray tracing methods.
At the equator and temperate latitudes in the ocean, the surface temperature is high enough to reverse the pressure effect, such that a sound speed minimum occurs at depth of a few hundred meters.  The presence of this minimum creates a special channel known as deep sound channel, or SOFAR (sound fixing and ranging) channel, permitting guided propagation of underwater sound for thousands of kilometers without interaction with the sea surface or the seabed. Another phenomenon in the deep sea is the formation of sound focusing areas, known as convergence zones. In this case sound is refracted downward from a near-surface source and then back up again. The horizontal distance from the source at which this occurs depends on the positive and negative sound speed gradients. A surface duct can also occur in both deep and moderately shallow water when there is upward refraction, for example due to cold surface temperatures.  Propagation is by repeated sound bounces off the surface.
In general, as sound propagates underwater there is a reduction in the sound intensity over increasing ranges, though in some circumstances a gain can be obtained due to focusing.  Propagation loss (sometimes referred to as transmission loss) is a quantitative measure of the reduction in sound intensity between two points, normally the sound source and a distant receiver.  If 

          I

            s

 is not the true acoustic intensity at the receiver, which is a vector quantity, but a scalar equal to the equivalent plane wave intensity (EPWI) of the sound field.  The EPWI is defined as the magnitude of the intensity of a plane wave of the same RMS pressure as the true acoustic field. At short range the propagation loss is dominated by spreading while at long range it is dominated by absorption and/or scattering losses.
These two definitions are not exactly equivalent because the characteristic impedance at the receiver may be different from that at the source.  Because of this, the use of the intensity definition leads to a different sonar equation to the definition based on a pressure ratio.  If the source and receiver are both in water, the difference is small.

Propagation modelling
The propagation of sound through water is described by the wave equation, with appropriate boundary conditions. A number of models have been developed to simplify propagation calculations. These models include ray theory, normal mode solutions, and parabolic equation simplifications of the wave equation. Each set of solutions is generally valid and computationally efficient in a limited frequency and range regime, and may involve other limits as well. Ray theory is more appropriate at short range and high frequency, while the other solutions function better at long range and low frequency. Various empirical and analytical formulae have also been derived from measurements that are useful approximations.

Reverberation
Transient sounds result in a decaying background that can be of much larger duration than the original transient signal.  The cause of this background, known as reverberation, is partly due to scattering from rough boundaries and partly due to scattering from fish and other biota.  For an acoustic signal to be detected easily, it must exceed the reverberation level as well as the background noise level.

Doppler shift
If an underwater object is moving relative to an underwater receiver, the frequency of the received sound is different from that of the sound radiated (or reflected) by the object.  This change in frequency is known as a Doppler shift.  The shift can be easily observed in active sonar systems, particularly narrow-band ones, because the transmitter frequency is known, and the relative motion between sonar and object can be calculated.  Sometimes the frequency of the radiated noise (a tonal) may also be known, in which case the same calculation can be done for passive sonar.   For active systems the change in frequency is 0.69 Hz per knot per kHz and half this for passive systems as propagation is only one way.  The shift corresponds to an increase in frequency for an approaching target.

Intensity fluctuations
Though acoustic propagation modelling generally predicts a constant received sound level, in practice there are both temporal and spatial fluctuations. These may be due to both small and large scale environmental phenomena.  These can include sound speed profile fine structure and frontal zones as well as internal waves.  Because in general there are multiple propagation paths between a source and receiver, small phase changes in the interference pattern between these paths can lead to large fluctuations in sound intensity.

Non-linearity
In water, especially with air bubbles, the change in density due to a change in pressure is not exactly linearly proportional.  As a consequence for a sinusoidal wave input additional harmonic and subharmonic frequencies are generated. When two sinusoidal waves are input, sum and difference frequencies are generated. The conversion process is greater at high source levels than small ones. Because of the non-linearity there is a dependence of sound speed on the pressure amplitude so that large changes travel faster than small ones. Thus a sinusoidal waveform gradually becomes a sawtooth one with a steep rise and a gradual tail.  Use is made of this phenomenon in parametric sonar and theories have been developed to account for this, e.g. by Westerfield.

Measurements
Sound in water is measured using a hydrophone, which is the underwater equivalent of a microphone.  A hydrophone measures pressure fluctuations, and these are usually converted to sound pressure level (SPL), which is a logarithmic measure of the mean square acoustic pressure.
Measurements are usually reported in one of two forms:

RMS acoustic pressure in pascals (or sound pressure level (SPL) in dB re 1 μPa)
spectral density (mean square pressure per unit bandwidth) in pascals squared per hertz (dB re 1 μPa2/Hz)
The scale for acoustic pressure in water differs from that used for sound in air. In air the reference pressure is 20 μPa rather than 1 μPa. For the same numerical value of SPL, the intensity of a plane wave (power per unit area, proportional to mean square sound pressure divided by acoustic impedance) in air is about 202×3600 = 1 440 000 times higher than in water. Similarly, the intensity is about the same if the SPL is 61.6 dB higher in the water.
The 2017 standard ISO 18405 defines terms and expressions used in the field of underwater acoustics, including the calculation of underwater sound pressure levels.

Sound speed
Approximate values for fresh water and seawater, respectively, at atmospheric pressure are 1450 and 1500 m/s for the sound speed, and 1000 and 1030 kg/m3 for the density.  The speed of sound in water increases with increasing pressure, temperature and salinity.  The maximum speed in pure water under atmospheric pressure is attained at about 74 °C; sound travels slower in hotter water after that point; the maximum increases with pressure.

Absorption
Many measurements have been made of sound absorption in lakes and the ocean
  (see Technical Guides – Calculation of absorption of sound in seawater for an on-line calculator).

Ambient noise
Measurement of acoustic signals are possible if their amplitude exceeds a minimum threshold, determined partly by the signal processing used and partly by the level of background noise.  Ambient noise is that part of the received noise that is independent of the source, receiver and platform characteristics.  Thus it excludes reverberation and towing noise for example.
The background noise present in the ocean, or ambient noise, has many different sources and varies with location and frequency. At the lowest frequencies, from about 0.1 Hz to 10 Hz, ocean turbulence and microseisms are the primary contributors to the noise background. Typical noise spectrum levels decrease with increasing frequency from about 140 dB re 1 μPa2/Hz at 1 Hz to about 30 dB re 1 μPa2/Hz at 100 kHz. Distant ship traffic is one of the dominant noise sources in most areas for frequencies of around 100 Hz, while wind-induced surface noise is the main source between 1 kHz and 30 kHz. At very high frequencies, above 100 kHz, thermal noise of water molecules begins to dominate. The thermal noise spectral level at 100 kHz is 25 dB re 1 μPa2/Hz.  The spectral density of thermal noise increases by 20 dB per decade (approximately 6 dB per octave).
Transient sound sources also contribute to ambient noise. These can include intermittent geological activity, such as earthquakes and underwater volcanoes, rainfall on the surface, and biological activity. Biological sources include cetaceans (especially blue, fin and sperm whales), certain types of fish, and snapping shrimp.
Rain can produce high levels of ambient noise. However the numerical relationship between rain rate and ambient noise level is difficult to determine because measurement of rain rate is problematic at sea.

Reverberation
Many measurements have been made of sea surface, bottom and volume reverberation.  Empirical models have sometimes been derived from these.  A commonly used expression for the band 0.4 to 6.4 kHz is that by Chapman and Harris. It is found that a sinusoidal waveform is spread in frequency due to the surface motion. For bottom reverberation a Lambert's Law is found often to apply approximately, for example see Mackenzie.  Volume reverberation is usually found to occur mainly in layers, which change depth with the time of day, e.g., see Marshall and Chapman.  The under-surface of ice can produce strong reverberation when it is rough, see for example Milne.

Bottom loss
Bottom loss has been measured as a function of grazing angle for many frequencies in various locations, for example those by the US Marine Geophysical Survey.  The loss depends on the sound speed in the bottom (which is affected by gradients and layering) and by roughness.  Graphs have been produced for the loss to be expected in particular circumstances. In shallow water bottom loss often has the dominant impact on long range propagation. At low frequencies sound can propagate through the sediment then back into the water.

Underwater hearing
Comparison with airborne sound levels
As with airborne sound, sound pressure level underwater is usually reported in units of decibels, but there are some important differences that make it difficult (and often inappropriate) to compare SPL in water with SPL in air.  These differences include:

difference in reference pressure: 1 μPa  (one micropascal, or one millionth of a pascal) instead of 20 μPa.
difference in interpretation: there are two schools of thought, one maintaining that pressures should be compared directly, and the other that one should first convert to the intensity of an equivalent plane wave.
difference in hearing sensitivity: any comparison with (A-weighted) sound in air needs to take into account the differences in hearing sensitivity, either of a human diver or other animal.

Human hearing
Hearing sensitivity
The lowest audible SPL for a human diver with normal hearing is about 67 dB re 1 μPa, with greatest sensitivity occurring at frequencies around 1 kHz. This corresponds to a sound intensity 5.4 dB, or 3.5 times, higher than the threshold in air (see Measurements above).

Safety thresholds
High levels of underwater sound create a potential hazard to human divers.  Guidelines for exposure of human divers to underwater sound are reported by the SOLMAR project of the NATO Undersea Research Centre.  Human divers exposed to SPL above 154 dB re 1 μPa in the frequency range 0.6 to 2.5 kHz are reported to experience changes in their heart rate or breathing frequency. Diver aversion to low frequency sound is dependent upon sound pressure level and center frequency.

Other species
Aquatic mammals
Dolphins and other toothed whales are known for their acute hearing sensitivity, especially in the frequency range 5 to 50 kHz.  Several species have hearing thresholds between 30 and 50 dB re 1 μPa in this frequency range.  For example, the hearing threshold of the killer whale occurs at an RMS acoustic pressure of 0.02 mPa (and frequency 15 kHz), corresponding to an SPL threshold of 26 dB re 1 μPa.
High levels of underwater sound create a potential hazard to marine and amphibious animals. The effects of exposure to underwater noise are reviewed by Southall et al.

Fish
The hearing sensitivity of fish is reviewed by Ladich and Fay.
The hearing threshold of the soldier fish, is 0.32 mPa (50 dB re 1 μPa) at 1.3 kHz, whereas the lobster has a hearing threshold of 1.3 Pa at 70 Hz (122 dB re 1 μPa). The effects of exposure to underwater noise are reviewed by Popper et al.

Aquatic birds
Several aquatic bird species have been observed to react to underwater sound in the 1–4 kHz range, which follows the frequency range of best hearing sensitivities of birds in air. Seaducks and cormorants have been trained to respond to sounds of 1–4 kHz with lowest hearing threshold (highest sensitivity) of 71 dB re 1 μPa (cormorants) and 105 dB re 1 μPa (seaducks). Diving species have several morphological differences in the ear relative to terrestrial species, suggesting some adaptations of the ear in diving birds to aquatic conditions

Applications of underwater acoustics
Sonar
Sonar is the name given to the acoustic equivalent of radar.  Pulses of sound are used to probe the sea, and the echoes are then processed to extract information about the sea, its boundaries and submerged objects.  An alternative use, known as passive sonar, attempts to do the same by listening to the sounds radiated by underwater objects.

Underwater communication
The need for underwater acoustic telemetry exists in applications such as data harvesting for environmental monitoring, communication with and between crewed and uncrewed underwater vehicles, transmission of diver speech, etc. A related application is underwater remote control, in which acoustic telemetry is used to remotely actuate a switch or trigger an event.  A prominent example of underwater remote control are acoustic releases, devices that are used to return sea floor deployed instrument packages or other payloads to the surface per remote command at the end of a deployment.  Acoustic communications form an active field of research
 with significant challenges to overcome, especially in horizontal, shallow-water channels. 
Compared with radio telecommunications, the available bandwidth is reduced by several orders of magnitude. The low speed of sound causes multipath propagation to stretch over time delay intervals of tens or hundreds of milliseconds, as well as significant Doppler shifts and spreading. Often acoustic communication systems are not limited by noise, but by reverberation and time variability beyond the capability of receiver algorithms. The fidelity of underwater communication links can be greatly improved by the use of hydrophone arrays, which allow processing techniques such as adaptive beamforming and diversity combining.

Underwater navigation and tracking
Underwater navigation and tracking is a common requirement for exploration and work by divers, ROV, autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV), crewed submersibles and submarines alike. Unlike most radio signals which are quickly absorbed, sound propagates far underwater and at a rate that can be precisely measured or estimated. It can thus be used to measure distances between a tracked target and one or multiple reference of baseline stations precisely, and triangulate the position of the target, sometimes with centimeter accuracy.  Starting in the 1960s, this has given rise to underwater acoustic positioning systems which are now widely used.

Seismic exploration
Seismic exploration involves the use of low frequency sound (< 100 Hz) to probe deep into the seabed.  Despite the relatively poor resolution due to their long wavelength, low frequency sounds are preferred because high frequencies are heavily attenuated when they travel through the seabed.  Sound sources used include airguns, vibroseis and explosives.

Weather and climate observation
Acoustic sensors can be used to monitor the sound made by wind and precipitation.  For example, an acoustic rain gauge is described by Nystuen. Lightning strikes can also be detected. Acoustic thermometry of ocean climate (ATOC) uses low frequency sound to measure the global ocean temperature.

Acoustical oceanography
Acoustical oceanography is the use of underwater sound to study the sea, its boundaries and its contents.

History
Interest in developing echo ranging systems began in earnest following the sinking of the RMS Titanic in 1912. By sending a sound wave ahead of a ship, the theory went, a return echo bouncing off the submerged portion of an iceberg should give early warning of collisions. By directing the same type of beam downwards, the depth to the bottom of the ocean could be calculated.
The first practical deep-ocean echo sounder was invented by Harvey C. Hayes, a U.S. Navy physicist. For the first time, it was possible to create a quasi-continuous profile of the ocean floor along the course of a ship. The first such profile was made by Hayes on board the U.S.S. Stewart, a Navy destroyer that sailed from Newport to Gibraltar between June 22 and 29, 1922. During that week, 900 deep-ocean soundings were made.
Using a refined echo sounder, the German survey ship Meteor made several passes across the South Atlantic from the equator to Antarctica between 1925 and 1927, taking soundings every 5 to 20 miles. Their work created the first detailed map of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It showed that the Ridge was a rugged mountain range, and not the smooth plateau that some scientists had envisioned. Since that time, both naval and research vessels have operated echo sounders almost continuously while at sea.
Equipment used
The earliest and most widespread use of sound and sonar technology to study the properties of the sea is the use of a rainbow echo sounder to measure water depth. Sounders were the devices used that mapped the many miles of the Santa Barbara Harbor ocean floor until 1993.
Fathometers measure the depth of the waters. It works by electronically sending sounds from ships, therefore also receiving the sound waves that bounces back from the bottom of the ocean. A paper chart moves through the fathometer and is calibrated to record the depth.
As technology advances, the development of high resolution sonars in the second half of the 20th century made it possible to not just detect underwater objects but to classify them and even image them. Electronic sensors are now attached to ROVs since nowadays, ships or robot submarines have Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs). There are cameras attached to these devices giving out accurate images. The oceanographers are able to get a clear and precise quality of pictures. The 'pictures' can also be sent from sonars by having sound reflected off ocean surroundings. Oftentimes sound waves reflect off animals, giving information which can be documented into deeper animal behaviour studies.

Marine biology
Due to its excellent propagation properties, underwater sound is used as a tool to aid the study of marine life, from microplankton to the blue whale.  Echo sounders are often used to provide data on marine life abundance, distribution, and behavior information.  Echo sounders, also referred to as hydroacoustics is also used for fish location, quantity, size, and biomass.
Acoustic telemetry is also used for monitoring fish and marine wildlife. An acoustic transmitter is attached to the fish (sometimes internally) while an array of receivers listen to the information conveyed by the sound wave. This enables the researchers to track the movements of individuals in a small-medium scale.
Pistol shrimp create sonoluminescent cavitation bubbles that reach up to 5,000 K (4,700 °C)

Particle physics
A neutrino is a fundamental particle that interacts very weakly with other matter.  For this reason, it requires detection apparatus on a very large scale, and the ocean is sometimes used for this purpose.  In particular, it is thought that ultra-high energy neutrinos in seawater can be detected acoustically.

Further reading
Quality assurance of hydroacoustic surveys: the repeatability of fish-abundance and biomass estimates in lakes within and between hydroacoustic systems  (free link to document)
Hydroacoustics as a tool for assessing fish biomass and size distribution associated with discrete shallow water estuarine habitats in Louisiana
Acoustic assessment of squid stocks
Summary of the use of hydroacoustics for quantifying the escapement of adult salmonids (Oncorhynchus and Salmo spp.) in rivers. Ransom, B.H., S.V. Johnston, and T.W. Steig. 1998. Presented at International Symposium and Workshop on Management and Ecology of River Fisheries, University of Hull, England, 30 March-3 April 1998
Multi-frequency acoustic assessment of fisheries and plankton resources.  Torkelson, T.C., T.C. Austin, and P.H. Weibe. 1998. Presented at the 135th Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America and the 16th Meeting of the International Congress of Acoustics, Seattle, Washington.
Acoustics Unpacked A great reference for freshwater hydroacoustics for resource assessment
Inter-Calibration of Scientific Echosounders in the Great Lakes
Hydroacoustic Evaluation of Spawning Red Hind Aggregations Along the Coast of Puerto Rico in 2002 and 2003
Feasibility Assessment of Split-Beam Hydroacoustic Techniques for Monitoring Adult Shortnose Sturgeon in the Delaware River
Categorising Salmon Migration Behaviour Using Characteristics of Split-beam Acoustic Data
Evaluation of Methods to Estimate Lake Herring Spawner Abundance in Lake Superior
Estimating Sockeye Salmon Smolt Flux and Abundance with Side-Looking Sonar
Herring Research: Using Acoustics to Count Fish.
Hydroacoustic Applications in Lake, River and Marine environments for study of plankton, fish, vegetation, substrate or seabed classification, and bathymetry.
Hydroacoustics: Rivers (in: Salmonid Field Protocols Handbook: Chapter 4)
Hydroacoustics: Lakes and Reservoirs (in: Salmonid Field Protocols Handbook: Chapter 5)
PAMGUARD:  An Open-Source Software Community Developing Marine Mammal Acoustic Detection and Localisation Software to Benefit the Marine Environment; 

================================================================================

# Oceanography

Oceanography (from Ancient Greek  ὠκεανός (ōkeanós) 'ocean' and  γραφή (graphḗ) 'writing'), also known as oceanology, sea science, ocean science, and marine science, is the scientific study of the ocean, including its physics, chemistry, biology, and geology.  
It is an Earth science, which covers a wide range of topics, including ocean currents, waves, and geophysical fluid dynamics;  fluxes of various chemical substances and physical properties within the ocean and across its boundaries; ecosystem dynamics; and plate tectonics and seabed geology. 
Oceanographers draw upon a wide range of disciplines to deepen their understanding of the world’s oceans, incorporating insights from astronomy, biology, chemistry, geography, geology, hydrology, meteorology and physics.

History
Early history
Humans first acquired knowledge of the waves and currents of the seas and oceans in pre-historic times. Observations on tides were recorded by Aristotle and Strabo in 384–322 BC. Early exploration of the oceans was primarily for cartography and mainly limited to its surfaces and of the animals that fishermen brought up in nets, though depth soundings by lead line were taken.
The Portuguese campaign of Atlantic navigation is the earliest example of a systematic scientific large project, sustained over many decades, studying the currents and winds of the Atlantic.
The work of Pedro Nunes (1502–1578) is remembered in the navigation context for the determination of the loxodromic curve: the shortest course between two points on the surface of a sphere represented onto a two-dimensional map. When he published his "Treatise of the Sphere" (1537), mostly a commentated translation of earlier work by others, he included a treatise on geometrical and astronomic methods of navigation. There he states clearly that Portuguese navigations were not an adventurous endeavour:
"nam se fezeram indo a acertar: mas partiam os nossos mareantes muy ensinados e prouidos de estromentos e regras de astrologia e geometria que sam as cousas que os cosmographos ham dadar apercebidas (...) e leuaua cartas muy particularmente rumadas e na ja as de que os antigos vsauam" (were not done by chance: but our seafarers departed well taught and provided with instruments and rules of astrology (astronomy) and geometry which were matters the cosmographers would provide (...) and they took charts with exact routes and no longer those used by the ancient).
His credibility rests on being personally involved in the instruction of pilots and senior seafarers from 1527 onwards by Royal appointment, along with his recognized competence as mathematician and astronomer.
The main problem in navigating back from the south of the Canary Islands (or south of Boujdour) by sail alone, is due to the change in the regime of winds and currents: the North Atlantic gyre and the Equatorial counter current  will push south along the northwest bulge of Africa, while the uncertain winds where the Northeast trades meet the Southeast trades (the doldrums)  leave a sailing ship to the mercy of the currents. Together, prevalent current and wind make northwards progress very difficult or impossible. It was to overcome this problem and clear the passage to India around Africa as a viable maritime trade route, that a systematic plan of exploration was devised by the Portuguese. The return route from regions south of the Canaries became the 'volta do largo' or 'volta do mar'. The 'rediscovery' of the Azores islands in 1427 is merely a reflection of the heightened strategic importance of the islands, now sitting on the return route from the western coast of Africa (sequentially called 'volta de Guiné' and 'volta da Mina'); and the references to the Sargasso Sea (also called at the time 'Mar da Baga'), to the west of the Azores, in 1436, reveals the western extent of the return route. This is necessary, under sail, to make use of the southeasterly and northeasterly winds away from the western coast of Africa, up to the northern latitudes where the westerly winds will bring the seafarers towards the western coasts of Europe.
The secrecy involving the Portuguese navigations, with the death penalty for the leaking of maps and routes, concentrated all sensitive records in the Royal Archives, completely destroyed by the Lisbon earthquake of 1775. However, the systematic nature of the Portuguese campaign, mapping the currents and winds of the Atlantic, is demonstrated by the understanding of the seasonal variations, with expeditions setting sail at different times of the year taking different routes to take account of seasonal predominate winds. This happens from as early as late 15th century and early 16th: Bartolomeu Dias followed the African coast on his way south in August 1487, while Vasco da Gama would take an open sea route from the latitude of Sierra Leone, spending three months in the open sea of the South Atlantic to profit from the southwards deflection of the southwesterly on the Brazilian side (and the Brazilian current going southward - Gama departed in July 1497); and Pedro Álvares Cabral (departing March 1500) took an even larger arch to the west, from the latitude of Cape Verde, thus avoiding the summer monsoon (which would have blocked the route taken by Gama at the time he set sail). Furthermore, there were systematic expeditions pushing into the western Northern Atlantic (Teive, 1454; Vogado, 1462; Teles, 1474; Ulmo, 1486).
The documents relating to the supplying of ships, and the ordering of sun declination tables for the southern Atlantic for as early as 1493–1496, all suggest a well-planned and systematic activity happening during the decade long period between Bartolomeu Dias finding the southern tip of Africa, and Gama's departure; additionally, there are indications of further travels by Bartolomeu Dias in the area. The most significant consequence of this systematic knowledge was the negotiation of the Treaty of Tordesillas in 1494, moving the line of demarcation 270 leagues to the west (from 100 to 370 leagues west of the Azores), bringing what is now Brazil into the Portuguese area of domination. The knowledge gathered from open sea exploration allowed for the well-documented extended periods of sail without sight of land, not by accident but as pre-determined planned route; for example, 30 days for Bartolomeu Dias culminating on Mossel Bay, the three months Gama spent in the South Atlantic to use the Brazil current (southward), or the 29 days Cabral took from Cape Verde up to landing in Monte Pascoal, Brazil.
The Danish expedition to Arabia 1761–67 can be said to be the world's first oceanographic expedition, as the ship Grønland had on board a group of scientists, including naturalist Peter Forsskål, who was assigned an explicit task by the king, Frederik V, to study and describe the marine life in the open sea, including finding the cause of mareel, or milky seas. For this purpose, the expedition was equipped with nets and scrapers, specifically designed to collect samples from the open waters and the bottom at great depth.
Although Juan Ponce de León in 1513 first identified the Gulf Stream, and the current was well known to mariners, Benjamin Franklin made the first scientific study of it and gave it its name. Franklin measured water temperatures during several Atlantic crossings and correctly explained the Gulf Stream's cause. Franklin and Timothy Folger printed the first map of the Gulf Stream in 1769–1770.

Information on the currents of the Pacific Ocean was gathered by explorers of the late 18th century, including James Cook and Louis Antoine de Bougainville. James Rennell wrote the first scientific textbooks on oceanography, detailing the current flows of the Atlantic and Indian oceans. During a voyage around the Cape of Good Hope in 1777, he mapped "the banks and currents at the Lagullas". He was also the first to understand the nature of the intermittent current near the Isles of Scilly, (now known as Rennell's Current). The tides and currents of the ocean are distinct. Tides are the rise and fall of sea levels created by the combination of the gravitational forces of the Moon along with the Sun (the Sun just in a much lesser extent) and are also caused by the Earth and Moon orbiting each other. An ocean current is a continuous, directed movement of seawater generated by a number of forces acting upon the water, including wind, the Coriolis effect, breaking waves, cabbeling, and temperature and salinity differences.
Sir James Clark Ross took the first modern sounding in deep sea in 1840, and Charles Darwin published a paper on reefs and the formation of atolls as a result of the second voyage of HMS Beagle in 1831–1836. Robert FitzRoy published a four-volume report of Beagle's three voyages. In 1841–1842 Edward Forbes undertook dredging in the Aegean Sea that founded marine ecology.
The first superintendent of the United States Naval Observatory (1842–1861), Matthew Fontaine Maury devoted his time to the study of marine meteorology, navigation, and charting prevailing winds and currents. His 1855 textbook Physical Geography of the Sea was one of the first comprehensive oceanography studies. Many nations sent oceanographic observations to Maury at the Naval Observatory, where he and his colleagues evaluated the information and distributed the results worldwide.

Modern oceanography
Knowledge of the oceans remained confined to the topmost few fathoms of the water and a small amount of the bottom, mainly in shallow areas. Almost nothing was known of the ocean depths. The British Royal Navy's efforts to chart all of the world's coastlines in the mid-19th century reinforced the vague idea that most of the ocean was very deep, although little more was known. As exploration ignited both popular and scientific interest in the polar regions and Africa, so too did the mysteries of the unexplored oceans.

The seminal event in the founding of the modern science of oceanography was the 1872–1876  Challenger expedition. As the first true oceanographic cruise, this expedition laid the groundwork for an entire academic and research discipline. In response to a recommendation from the Royal Society, the British Government announced in 1871 an expedition to explore world's oceans and conduct appropriate scientific investigation. Charles Wyville Thomson and Sir John Murray launched the Challenger expedition. Challenger, leased from the Royal Navy, was modified for scientific work and equipped with separate laboratories for natural history and chemistry. Under the scientific supervision of Thomson, Challenger travelled nearly 70,000 nautical miles (130,000 km) surveying and exploring. On her journey circumnavigating the globe, 492 deep sea soundings, 133 bottom dredges, 151 open water trawls and 263 serial water temperature observations were taken. Around 4,700 new species of marine life were discovered. The result was the Report Of The Scientific Results of the Exploring Voyage of H.M.S. Challenger during the years 1873–76. Murray, who supervised the publication, described the report as "the greatest advance in the knowledge of our planet since the celebrated discoveries of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries". He went on to found the academic discipline of oceanography at the University of Edinburgh, which remained the centre for oceanographic research well into the 20th century. Murray was the first to study marine trenches and in particular the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, and map the sedimentary deposits in the oceans. He tried to map out the world's ocean currents based on salinity and temperature observations, and was the first to correctly understand the nature of coral reef development.
In the late 19th century, other Western nations also sent out scientific expeditions (as did private individuals and institutions). The first purpose-built oceanographic ship, Albatros, was built in 1882. In 1893, Fridtjof Nansen allowed his ship, Fram, to be frozen in the Arctic ice. This enabled him to obtain oceanographic, meteorological and astronomical data at a stationary spot over an extended period.

In 1881 the geographer John Francon Williams published a seminal book, Geography of the Oceans. Between 1907 and 1911 Otto Krümmel published the Handbuch der Ozeanographie, which became influential in awakening public interest in oceanography. The four-month 1910 North Atlantic expedition headed by John Murray and Johan Hjort was the most ambitious research oceanographic and marine zoological project ever mounted until then, and led to the classic 1912 book The Depths of the Ocean.
The first acoustic measurement of sea depth was made in 1914. Between 1925 and 1927 the "Meteor" expedition gathered 70,000 ocean depth measurements using an echo sounder, surveying the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
In 1934, Easter Ellen Cupp, the first woman to have earned a PhD (at Scripps) in the United States, completed a major work on diatoms that remained the standard taxonomy in the field until well after her death in 1999. In 1940, Cupp was let go from her position at Scripps. Sverdrup specifically commended Cupp as a conscientious and industrious worker and commented that his decision was no reflection on her ability as a scientist. Sverdrup used the instructor billet vacated by Cupp to employ Marston Sargent, a biologist studying marine algae, which was not a new research program at Scripps. Financial pressures did not prevent Sverdrup from retaining the services of two other young post-doctoral students, Walter Munk and Roger Revelle. Cupp's partner, Dorothy Rosenbury, found her a position teaching high school, where she remained for the rest of her career. (Russell, 2000)
Sverdrup, Johnson and Fleming published The Oceans in 1942, which was a major landmark. The Sea (in three volumes, covering physical oceanography, seawater and geology) edited by M.N. Hill was published in 1962, while Rhodes Fairbridge's Encyclopedia of Oceanography was published in 1966.
The Great Global Rift, running along the Mid Atlantic Ridge, was discovered by Maurice Ewing and Bruce Heezen in 1953 and mapped by Heezen and Marie Tharp using bathymetric data; in 1954 a mountain range under the Arctic Ocean was found by the Arctic Institute of the USSR. The theory of seafloor spreading was developed in 1960 by Harry Hammond Hess. The Ocean Drilling Program started in 1966. Deep-sea vents were discovered in 1977 by Jack Corliss and Robert Ballard in the submersible DSV Alvin.
In the 1950s, Auguste Piccard invented the bathyscaphe and used the bathyscaphe Trieste to investigate the ocean's depths. The United States nuclear submarine Nautilus made the first journey under the ice to the North Pole in 1958. In 1962 the FLIP (Floating Instrument Platform), a 355-foot (108 m) spar buoy, was first deployed.
In 1968, Tanya Atwater led the first all-woman oceanographic expedition. Until that time, gender policies restricted women oceanographers from participating in voyages to a significant extent.
From the 1970s, there has been much emphasis on the application of large scale computers to oceanography to allow numerical predictions of ocean conditions and as a part of overall environmental change prediction. Early techniques included analog computers (such as the Ishiguro Storm Surge Computer) generally now replaced by numerical methods (e.g. SLOSH.) An oceanographic buoy array was established in the Pacific to allow prediction of El Niño events.
1990 saw the start of the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) which continued until 2002. Geosat seafloor mapping data became available in 1995.
Study of the oceans is critical to understanding shifts in Earth's energy balance along with related global and regional changes in climate, the biosphere and biogeochemistry. The atmosphere and ocean are linked because of evaporation and precipitation as well as thermal flux (and solar insolation). Recent studies have advanced knowledge on ocean acidification, ocean heat content, ocean currents, sea level rise, the oceanic carbon cycle, the water cycle, Arctic sea ice decline, coral bleaching, marine heatwaves, extreme weather, coastal erosion and many other phenomena in regards to ongoing climate change and climate feedbacks.
In general, understanding the world ocean through further scientific study enables better stewardship and sustainable utilization of Earth's resources. The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission reports that 1.7% of the total national research expenditure of its members is focused on ocean science.

Branches
The study of oceanography is divided into these five branches:

Biological oceanography
Biological oceanography investigates the ecology and biology of marine organisms in the context of the physical, chemical and geological characteristics of their ocean environment.

Chemical oceanography
Chemical oceanography is the study of the chemistry of the ocean. Whereas chemical oceanography is primarily occupied with the study and understanding of seawater properties and its changes, ocean chemistry focuses primarily on the geochemical cycles. The following is a central topic investigated by chemical oceanography.

Ocean acidification
Ocean acidification describes the decrease in ocean pH that is caused by anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions into the atmosphere. Seawater is slightly alkaline and had a preindustrial pH of about 8.2. More recently, anthropogenic activities have steadily increased the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere; about 30–40% of the added CO2 is absorbed by the oceans, forming carbonic acid and lowering the pH (now below 8.1) through ocean acidification. The pH is expected to reach 7.7 by the year 2100.
An important element for the skeletons of marine animals is calcium, but calcium carbonate becomes more soluble with pressure, so carbonate shells and skeletons dissolve below the carbonate compensation depth. Calcium carbonate becomes more soluble at lower pH, so ocean acidification is likely to affect marine organisms with calcareous shells, such as oysters, clams, sea urchins and corals, and the carbonate compensation depth will rise closer to the sea surface. Affected planktonic organisms will include pteropods, coccolithophorids and foraminifera, all important in the food chain. In tropical regions, corals are likely to be severely affected as they become less able to build their calcium carbonate skeletons, in turn adversely impacting other reef dwellers.
The current rate of ocean chemistry change seems to be unprecedented in Earth's geological history, making it unclear how well marine ecosystems will adapt to the shifting conditions of the near future. Of particular concern is the manner in which the combination of acidification with the expected additional stressors of higher ocean temperatures and lower oxygen levels will impact the seas.

Geological oceanography
Geological oceanography is the study of the geology of the ocean floor including plate tectonics and paleoceanography.

Physical oceanography
Physical oceanography studies the ocean's physical attributes including temperature-salinity structure, mixing, surface waves, internal waves, surface tides, internal tides, and currents. The following are central topics investigated by physical oceanography.

Seismic Oceanography
Ocean currents
Since the early ocean expeditions in oceanography, a major interest was the study of ocean currents and temperature measurements. The tides, the Coriolis effect, changes in direction and strength of wind, salinity, and temperature are the main factors determining ocean currents. The thermohaline circulation (THC) (thermo- referring to temperature and -haline referring to salt content) connects the ocean basins and is primarily dependent on the density of sea water. It is becoming more common to refer to this system as the 'meridional overturning circulation' because it more accurately accounts for other driving factors beyond temperature and salinity. 

Examples of sustained currents are the Gulf Stream and the Kuroshio Current which are wind-driven western boundary currents.

Ocean heat content
Oceanic heat content (OHC) refers to the extra heat stored in the ocean from changes in Earth's energy balance. The increase in the ocean heat play an important role in sea level rise, because of thermal expansion. Ocean warming accounts for 90% of the energy accumulation associated with global warming since 1971.

Paleoceanography
Paleoceanography is the study of the history of the oceans in the geologic past with regard to circulation, chemistry, biology, geology and patterns of sedimentation and biological productivity. Paleoceanographic studies using environment models and different proxies enable the scientific community to assess the role of the oceanic processes in the global climate by the reconstruction of past climate at various intervals. Paleoceanographic research is also intimately tied to palaeoclimatology.

Oceanographic institutions
The earliest international organizations of oceanography were founded at the turn of the 20th century, starting with the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea created in 1902, followed in 1919 by the Mediterranean Science Commission. Marine research institutes were already in existence, starting with the Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn in Naples, Italy (1872), the Biological Station of Roscoff, France (1876), the Arago Laboratory in Banyuls-sur-mer, France (1882), the Laboratory of the Marine Biological Association in Plymouth, UK (1884), the Norwegian Institute for Marine Research in Bergen, Norway (1900), the Laboratory für internationale Meeresforschung, Kiel, Germany (1902). On the other side of the Atlantic, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography was founded in 1903, followed by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in 1930, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science in 1938, the Lamont–Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University in 1949, and later the School of Oceanography at University of Washington. In Australia, the Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS), established in 1972 soon became a key player in marine tropical research.
In 1921 the International Hydrographic Bureau, called since 1970 the International Hydrographic Organization, was established to develop hydrographic and nautical charting standards.

Related disciplines
See also
References
Sources and further reading
Boling Guo, Daiwen Huang. Infinite-Dimensional Dynamical Systems in Atmospheric and Oceanic Science, 2014, World Scientific Publishing, ISBN 978-981-4590-37-2. Sample Chapter
Hamblin, Jacob Darwin (2005) Oceanographers and the Cold War: Disciples of Marine Science. University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-98482-7
Lang, Michael A., Ian G. Macintyre, and Klaus Rützler, eds. Proceedings of the Smithsonian Marine Science Symposium. Smithsonian Contributions to the Marine Sciences, no. 38. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press (2009)
Roorda, Eric Paul, ed. The Ocean Reader: History, Culture, Politics (Duke University Press, 2020) 523 pp. online review
Steele, J., K. Turekian and S. Thorpe. (2001). Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences. San Diego: Academic Press. (6 vols.) ISBN 0-12-227430-X
Sverdrup, Keith A., Duxbury, Alyn C., Duxbury, Alison B. (2006). Fundamentals of Oceanography, McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-282678-9
Russell, Joellen Louise. Easter Ellen Cupp, 2000, Regents of the University of California.


================================================================================

# AAI underwater revolver

The AAI underwater revolver is an amphibious firearm intended for naval use. The weapon was designed by Irwin R. Barr and John L. Critcher and uses a six-round cylinder inside a jacket covered by a float.



================================================================================

# ABISMO

ABISMO (Automatic Bottom Inspection and Sampling Mobile) is a remotely operated underwater vehicle (ROV) built by the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) for exploration of the deep sea. It is the only remaining ROV rated to 11,000-meters (after Nereus, built and operated by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution was lost at sea in 2014), ABISMO is intended to be the permanent replacement for Kaikō, a ROV that was lost at sea in 2003.

Kaikō
Between 1995 and 2003, Kaikō conducted more than 250 dives, collecting 350 biological species (including 180 different bacteria), some of which could prove to be useful in medical and industrial applications. Kaikō reached a maximum depth of 10,911.4 meters at the Challenger Deep on 24 March 1995, during its initial sea trials. Kaikō returned to Challenger Deep in February 1996, this time reaching a maximum depth of 10,898 meters. Kaikō made its last visit to Challenger Deep in May 1998. On 29 May 2003, Kaikō was lost at sea off the coast of Shikoku Island during Typhoon Chan-Hom, when a steel secondary cable connecting it to its launcher at the ocean surface broke. In May 2004, JAMSTEC resumed its research operations, using a converted ROV as its vehicle. This ROV, formerly known as UROV 7K, was rechristened Kaikō7000II. The 7000 designation indicates that this vessel is rated for diving to a maximum depth of 7,000 meters.

RV Kairei
RV Kairei (かいれい) is a deep sea research vessel that served as the support ship for Kaikō, and for its replacement ROV, Kaikō7000II. It now serves as the support ship for ABISMO. Kairei uses ABISMO to conduct surveys and observations of oceanic plateaus, abyssal plains, oceanic basins, submarine volcanoes, hydrothermal vents, oceanic trenches and other underwater terrain features to a maximum depth of 11,000 meters. Kairei also conducts surveys of the structure of deep sub-bottoms with complicated geographical shapes in subduction zones using its on-board multi-channel reflection survey system.

Development of ABISMO
While the temporary replacement ROV (Kaikō7000II) has a remarkable performance record, it is only rated to 7,000 meters and cannot reach the deepest oceanic trenches. For this reason, JAMSTEC engineers began work on a new 11,000-meter class of ROV in April 2005. The project is called ABISMO (Automatic Bottom Inspection and Sampling Mobile), which translates to abyss in Spanish and Portuguese.
Like Kaikō, ABISMO consists of 4 major parts:

electronic instruments aboard RV Kairei, the support ship
Launcher (a sampling station)
Vehicle (a sediment probe)
Samplers (a gravity corer or Smith Macintyre type sampler)
Except for the sampler and the smaller size of the ROV itself, the system configuration is the same as for Kaikō. The launcher launches and recovers the ROV along with its sampler. Click here to see a photograph of ABISMO and its launcher, as well as RV Kairei, the support ship.
The lower part of the launcher is constructed of a stainless steel framework, within which the vehicle is stored. Pressure hulls for electronic devices, a winch, a secondary cable drum and two electric transformers are located in the upper part of the launcher. The samplers include a gravity core sampler and a bottom grab sampler. There is also a docking system and an acoustic positioning system in the lower part of the launcher. The vehicle is hung in the launcher by the docking system. When the system detaches it and the cable drum feeds the secondary cable, the vehicle can dive down, and its position is measured by the acoustic positioning system. The position of the launcher is measured by RV Kairei, the support ship. The launcher also has a high-definition television (HDTV) camera with pan and tilt functions.
Initial sea trials of ABISMO were conducted in 2007. The craft successfully reached a planned depth of 9,760-meters, the deepest part of Izu–Ogasawara Trench, where it collected core samples of sediment from the seabed. Plans are underway for a mission to the Challenger Deep.
In June 2008, the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) deployed the 4,517-ton Deep Sea Research Vessel Kairei to the area of Guam for cruise KR08-05 Leg 1 and Leg 2.
On 1–3 June 2008, during Leg 1, the Japanese robotic deep-sea probe ABISMO (Automatic Bottom Inspection and Sampling Mobile) on dives 11-13 almost reached the bottom about 150 km (93 mi) east of the Challenger Deep: "Unfortunately, we were unable to dive to the sea floor because the legacy primary cable of the Kaiko system was a little bit short. The 2-m long gravity core sampler was dropped in free fall, and sediment samples of 1.6m length were obtained. Twelve bottles of water samples were also obtained at various depths..."  ABISMO's dive #14 was into the TOTO caldera (12°42.7777 N, 143°32.4055 E), about 60 nmi northeast of the deepest waters of the central basin of the Challenger Deep, where they obtained videos of the hydrothermal plume. Upon successful testing to 10,000 m (32,808 ft), JAMSTEC’ ROV ABISMO became, briefly, the only full-ocean-depth rated ROV in existence. On 31 May 2009, the ABISMO was joined by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution's HROV Nereus as the only two operational full ocean depth capable remotely operated vehicles in existence. During the ROV ABISMO's deepest sea trails dive its manometer measured a depth of 10,257 m (33,652 ft) ±3 m (10 ft) in “Area 1” (vicinity of 12°43’ N, 143°33’ E).
Leg 2, under chief scientist Takashi Murashima, operated at the Challenger Deep June 8–9, 2008, testing JAMSTEC's new full ocean depth “Free Fall Mooring System,” i.e. a lander. The lander was successfully tested twice to 10,895 m (35,745 ft) depth, taking video images and sediment samplings at 11°22.14′N 142°25.76′E, in the central basin of the Challenger Deep.

See also
Autonomous underwater vehicle – Uncrewed underwater vehicle with autonomous guidance system
Bathymetry – Study of underwater depth of lake or ocean floors
Deep sea – Lowest layer in the ocean
Deep-submergence vehicle – Self-propelled deep-diving crewed submersible
Diving chamber – Hyperbaric pressure vessel for human occupancy used in diving operations
Explorer AUV – Autonomous underwater vehicle from People's Republic of China
Kaikō ROV – Japanese remotely operated underwater vehicle for deep sea exploration
DSV Limiting Factor – Crewed full ocean depth rated submersible
Sea Pole-class bathyscaphe – Chinese bathyscaphe class
DSV Shinkai – Crewed research submersible
Timeline of diving technology – Chronological list of notable events in the history of underwater diving equipment

================================================================================

# ADS amphibious rifle

The ADS (Russian: АДС - Автомат Двухсредный Специальный - Special Dual-environment Automatic rifle) is a Russian assault rifle specially made for combat divers. It is of a bullpup layout and is chambered in the 5.45×39mm M74 round. The ADS can adapt a suppressor and optical sights.

History
For several decades, Soviet and then Russian combat divers and naval commando units were armed with special weapons for underwater combat, including the SPP-1 pistol and APS underwater assault rifle. The main drawback of these weapons is that their effectiveness (and life expectancy) for use above the water is severely degraded compared to standard 'above water' weapons. Therefore, combat divers and other Spetsnaz units, when engaged in amphibious operations (below the water and above), had to carry on the mission two types of weapons - one for underwater use and another for use when on shore or on board of enemy surface vessels. The first known attempt to produce a single weapon which could be effectively used either below or above the water was the ASM-DT experimental 'dual-medium' or amphibious assault rifle, developed in Tula in around 2000. 
The main problem with ASM-DT was that it still had to use long, specially designed underwater ammunition when submerged, which necessitated an overlong receiver, complicated magazine well of adjustable size and two types of magazines. This was found unsuitable for combat use, and further development commenced at the famous arms development facility KBP (Instrument Design Bureau) in Tula. By 2005, the design team at KBP has successfully developed effective underwater ammunition which retains the compact size of the standard issue 5.45×39mm rounds, and thus can be loaded and fired from standard AK-74-type box magazines, and, more importantly, fired from the same chambers and barrels that would accept the 'above-water' ammunition.

Design
The rifle was designed by Russia's Tula Instrument Design Bureau. It is equipped with a 40 mm grenade launcher which has a range of 400 m and fires various modifications of VOG-25 grenade (no mention is made of grenades for underwater use). The weight of the gun including the grenade launcher and without sight is approximately 4.6 kg. The weapon uses 5.45×39mm bullets and fires at a firing rate of 700 rounds per minute with a range on land of 500 m. The weapon's effective underwater firing range when using the specially designed cartridge is about 25 meters at a depth of 5 meters and 18 m at a depth of 20 m (the underwater cartridge very similar in external appearance to the standard 5.45×39mm ammunition except for a different specially calculated bullet shape). The length of the bullet is 53.5 mm compared to an overall cartridge length of 57 mm.
Fired cartridge extraction to the forward makes ambidextrous shooting convenient and reduces gas pollution in the face of the shooter region.

Trials and adoption
The ADS was under extensive field trials by undisclosed units of Russian Naval special forces. It will replace APS underwater weapons and, possibly, some AK-74M general issue assault rifles in service with Russian Navy special operation units and other Russian special forces, which might be engaged in underwater operations (security, counter-terrorism in the sea, etc.). It entered service in August 2013. 
Rosoboronexport signed a contract with one of the CIS countries for the supply of ADS. As of September 2016, ADS entered service with the Russian Ministry of Defence Special Operations Force Command combat divers. Russian MoD released a video where ADS amphibious rifle is seen being used underwater by Russian Submarine Forces, during one of their defense drills. 
The Russian armed forces has received the first batch of ADS amphibious assault rifles in December 2019.

================================================================================

# Ocean heat content

Ocean heat content (OHC) or ocean heat uptake (OHU) is the energy absorbed and stored by oceans. It is an important indicator of global warming. Ocean heat content is calculated by measuring ocean temperature at many different locations and depths, and integrating the areal density of a change in enthalpic energy over an ocean basin or entire ocean. 
Between 1971 and 2018, a steady upward trend in ocean heat content accounted for over 90% of Earth's excess energy from global warming. Scientists estimate a 1961–2022 warming trend of 0.43 ± 0.08 W/m², accelerating at about 0.15 ± 0.04 W/m² per decade. By 2020, about one third of the added energy had propagated to depths below 700 meters.  The five highest ocean heat observations to a depth of 2000 meters all occurred in the period 2020–2024. The main driver of this increase has been human-caused greenhouse gas emissions.
Ocean water can absorb a lot of solar energy because water has far greater heat capacity than atmospheric gases.  As a result, the top few meters of the ocean contain more energy than the entire Earth's atmosphere.  Since before 1960, research vessels and stations have sampled sea surface temperatures and temperatures at greater depth all over the world. Since 2000, an expanding network of nearly 4000 Argo robotic floats has measured temperature anomalies, or the change in ocean heat content.  The upper 2000 meters of the global ocean has experienced warming on average since the 1970s, while the rate of warming varies regionally with the subpolar North Atlantic warming more slowly and the Southern Ocean taking up a disproportionately large amount of heat.  Deep-ocean warming below 2000 meters has also been largest in the Southern Ocean compared to other ocean basins.
Changes in ocean temperature greatly affect ecosystems in oceans and on land. For example, there are multiple impacts on coastal ecosystems and communities relying on their ecosystem services. Direct effects include variations in sea level and sea ice, changes to the intensity of the water cycle, and the migration of marine life.

Calculations
Definition
Ocean heat content is a term used in physical oceanography to describe a type of thermodynamic potential energy that is stored in the ocean. It is defined in coordination with the equation of state of seawater. TEOS-10 is an international standard approved in 2010 by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission.
Calculation of ocean heat content follows that of enthalpy referenced to the ocean surface, also called potential enthalpy. OHC changes are thus made more readily comparable to seawater heat exchanges with ice, freshwater, and humid air.  OHC is always reported as a change or as an "anomaly" relative to a baseline.  Positive values then also quantify ocean heat uptake (OHU) and are useful to diagnose where most of planetary energy gains from global heating are going.
To calculate the ocean heat content, measurements of ocean temperature from sample parcels of seawater gathered at many different locations and depths are required. Integrating the areal density of ocean heat over an ocean basin, or entire ocean, gives the total ocean heat content. Thus, total ocean heat content is a volume integral of the product of temperature, density, and heat capacity over the three-dimensional region of the ocean for which data is available. The bulk of measurements have been performed at depths shallower than about 2000 m (1.25 miles).
Measurements of temperature versus ocean depth generally show an upper mixed layer (0–200 m), a thermocline (200–1500 m), and a deep ocean layer (>1500 m). These boundary depths are only rough approximations. Sunlight penetrates to a maximum depth of about 200 m; the top 80 m of which is the habitable zone for photosynthetic marine life covering over 70% of Earth's surface. Wave action and other surface turbulence help to equalize temperatures throughout the upper layer.
Unlike surface temperatures which decrease with latitude, deep-ocean temperatures are relatively cold and uniform in most regions of the world. About 50% of all ocean volume is at depths below 3000 m (1.85 miles), with the Pacific Ocean being the largest and deepest of five oceanic divisions. The thermocline is the transition between upper and deep layers in terms of temperature, nutrient flows, abundance of life, and other properties. It is semi-permanent in the tropics, variable in temperate regions (often deepest during the summer), and shallow to nonexistent in polar regions.

Measurements
Ocean heat content measurements come with difficulties, especially before the deployment of the Argo profiling floats. Due to poor spatial coverage and poor quality of data, it has not always been easy to distinguish between long term global warming trends and climate variability. Examples of these complicating factors are the variations caused by El Niño–Southern Oscillation or changes in ocean heat content caused by major volcanic eruptions.
Argo is an international program of robotic profiling floats deployed globally since the start of the 21st century. The program's initial 3000 units had expanded to nearly 4000 units by year 2020. At the start of each 10-day measurement cycle, a float descends to a depth of 1000 meters and drifts with the current there for nine days. It then descends to 2000 meters and measures temperature, salinity (conductivity), and depth (pressure)  over a final day of ascent to the surface. At the surface the float transmits the depth profile and horizontal position data through satellite relays before repeating the cycle.
Starting 1992, the TOPEX/Poseidon and subsequent Jason satellite series altimeters have observed vertically integrated OHC, which is a major component of sea level rise. Since 2002, GRACE and GRACE-FO have remotely monitored ocean changes using gravimetry. The partnership between Argo and satellite measurements has yielded ongoing improvements to estimates of OHC and other global ocean properties.

Causes for heat uptake
Ocean heat uptake accounts for over 90% of total planetary heat uptake, mainly as a consequence of human-caused changes to the composition of Earth's atmosphere.  This high percentage is because waters at and below the ocean surface - especially the turbulent upper mixed layer - exhibit a thermal inertia much larger than the planet's exposed continental crust, ice-covered polar regions, or atmospheric components themselves. A body with large thermal inertia stores a big amount of energy  because of its heat capacity, and effectively transmits energy according to its heat transfer coefficient. Most extra energy that enters the planet via the atmosphere is thereby taken up and retained by the ocean.

Planetary heat uptake or heat content accounts for the entire energy added to or removed from the climate system.  It can be computed as an accumulation over time of the observed differences (or imbalances) between total incoming and outgoing radiation.
Changes to the imbalance have been estimated from Earth orbit by CERES and other remote instruments,  and compared against in-situ surveys of heat inventory changes in oceans, land, ice and the atmosphere.  Achieving complete and accurate results from either accounting method is challenging, but in different ways that are viewed by researchers as being mostly independent of each other.   Increases in planetary heat content for the well-observed 2005–2019 period are thought to exceed measurement uncertainties.
From the ocean perspective, the more abundant equatorial solar irradiance is directly absorbed by Earth's tropical surface waters and drives the overall poleward propagation of heat. The surface also exchanges energy that has been absorbed by the lower troposphere through wind and wave action. Over time, a sustained imbalance in Earth's energy budget enables a net flow of heat either into or out of greater ocean depth via thermal conduction, downwelling, and upwelling.  Releases of OHC to the atmosphere occur primarily via evaporation and enable the planetary water cycle. Concentrated releases in association with high sea surface temperatures help drive tropical cyclones, atmospheric rivers, atmospheric heat waves and other extreme weather events that can penetrate far inland.  Altogether these processes enable the ocean to be Earth's largest thermal reservoir which functions to regulate the planet's climate; acting as both a sink and a source of energy.

From  the perspective of land and ice covered regions,  their portion of heat uptake is reduced and delayed by the dominant thermal inertia of the ocean. Although the average rise in land surface temperature has exceeded the ocean surface due to the lower inertia (smaller heat-transfer coefficient) of solid land and ice, temperatures would rise more rapidly and by a greater amount without the full ocean.  Measurements of how rapidly the heat mixes into the deep ocean have also been underway to better close the ocean and planetary energy budgets.

Recent observations and changes
Numerous independent studies in recent years have found a multi-decadal rise in OHC of upper ocean regions that has begun to penetrate to deeper regions. The upper ocean (0–700 m) has warmed since 1971, while it is very likely that warming has occurred at intermediate depths (700–2000 m) and likely that deep ocean (below 2000 m) temperatures have increased. The heat uptake results from a persistent warming imbalance in Earth's energy budget that is most fundamentally caused by the anthropogenic increase in atmospheric greenhouse gases. There is very high confidence that increased ocean heat content in response to anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions is essentially irreversible on human time scales.

Studies based on Argo measurements indicate that ocean surface winds, especially the subtropical trade winds in the Pacific Ocean, change ocean heat vertical distribution. This results in changes among ocean currents, and an increase of the subtropical overturning, which is also related to the El Niño and La Niña phenomenon. Depending on stochastic natural variability fluctuations, during La Niña years around 30% more heat from the upper ocean layer is transported into the deeper ocean. Furthermore, studies have shown that approximately one-third of the observed warming in the ocean is taking place in the 700–2000 meter ocean layer.
Model studies indicate that ocean currents transport more heat into deeper layers during La Niña years, following changes in wind circulation. Years with increased ocean heat uptake have been associated with negative phases of the interdecadal Pacific oscillation (IPO). This is of particular interest to climate scientists who use the data to estimate the ocean heat uptake.
The upper ocean heat content in most North Atlantic regions is dominated by heat transport convergence (a location where ocean currents meet), without large changes to temperature and salinity relation. Additionally, a study from 2022 on anthropogenic warming in the ocean indicates that 62% of the warming from the years between 1850 and 2018 in the North Atlantic along 25°N is kept in the water below 700 m, where a major percentage of the ocean's surplus heat is stored.
A study in 2015 concluded that ocean heat content increases by the Pacific Ocean were compensated by an abrupt distribution of OHC into the Indian Ocean.
A large-ensemble reanalysis of ocean warming published in 2024 estimated a 1961–2022 warming trend of 0.43 ± 0.08 W/m², along with a statistically significant acceleration rate of 0.15 ± 0.04 W/m² per decade which is consistent with similar independent analysis. The net rate of change in the top 2000 meters from 2003 to 2018 was +0.58±0.08 W/m2 (or annual mean energy gain of 9.3 zettajoules).

Southern Ocean Heat Uptake
Impacts
Warming oceans are one reason for coral bleaching and contribute to the migration of marine species. Marine heat waves are regions of life-threatening and persistently elevated water temperatures. Redistribution of the planet's internal energy by atmospheric circulation and ocean currents produces internal climate variability, often in the form of irregular oscillations, and helps to sustain the global thermohaline circulation.
The increase in OHC accounts for 30–40% of global sea-level rise from 1900 to 2020 because of thermal expansion.
It is also an accelerator of sea ice, iceberg, and tidewater glacier melting. The ice loss reduces polar albedo, amplifying both the regional and global energy imbalances. 
The resulting ice retreat has been rapid and widespread for Arctic sea ice, and within northern fjords such as those of Greenland and Canada.
Impacts to Antarctic sea ice and the vast Antarctic ice shelves which terminate into the Southern Ocean have varied by region and are also increasing due to warming waters.  Breakup of the Thwaites Ice Shelf and its West Antarctica neighbors contributed about 10% of sea-level rise in 2020.
The ocean also functions as a sink and source of carbon, with a role comparable to that of land regions in Earth's carbon cycle.  In accordance with the temperature dependence of Henry's law, warming surface waters are less able to absorb atmospheric gases including oxygen and the growing emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases from human activity. Nevertheless the rate in which the ocean absorbs anthropogenic carbon dioxide has approximately tripled from the early 1960s to the late 2010s; a scaling proportional to the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide. The increase in CO2 levels causes ocean acidification, which is where the pH of the ocean decreases due to the uptake of CO2. This impacts the various species including reducing growth and calcification rates for calcifiers, lowering the capacity of acid base regulation in bivalves, and being harmful to the metabolic pathways of organisms which can lower the amount of energy these organisms are able to produce. 
Warming of the deep ocean has the further potential to melt and release some of the vast store of frozen methane hydrate deposits that have naturally accumulated there.
================================================================================

# Abrupt climate change

An abrupt climate change occurs when the climate system is forced to transition at a rate that is determined by the climate system energy-balance. The transition rate is more rapid than the rate of change of the external forcing, though it may include sudden forcing events such as meteorite impacts. Abrupt climate change therefore is a variation beyond the variability of a climate. Past events include the end of the Carboniferous Rainforest Collapse, Younger Dryas, Dansgaard–Oeschger events, Heinrich events and possibly also the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum. The term is also used within the context of climate change to describe sudden climate change that is detectable over the time-scale of a human lifetime. Such a sudden climate change can be the result of feedback loops within the climate system or tipping points in the climate system.
Scientists may use different timescales when speaking of abrupt events. For example, the duration of the onset of the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum may have been anywhere between a few decades and several thousand years. In comparison, climate models predict that under ongoing greenhouse gas emissions, the Earth's near surface temperature could depart from the usual range of variability in the last 150 years as early as 2047.

Definitions
Abrupt climate change can be defined in terms of physics or in terms of impacts: "In terms of physics, it is a transition of the climate system into a different mode on a time scale that is faster than the responsible forcing. In terms of impacts, an abrupt change is one that takes place so rapidly and unexpectedly that human or natural systems have difficulty adapting to it. These definitions are complementary: the former gives some insight into how abrupt climate change comes about; the latter explains why there is so much research devoted to it."

Timescales
Timescales of events described as abrupt may vary dramatically.  Changes recorded in the climate of Greenland at the end of the Younger Dryas, as measured by ice-cores, imply a sudden warming of +10 °C (+18 °F) within a timescale of a few years. Other abrupt changes are the +4 °C (+7.2 °F) on Greenland 11,270 years ago or the abrupt +6 °C (11 °F) warming 22,000 years ago on Antarctica.
By contrast, the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum may have initiated anywhere between a few decades and several thousand years. Finally, Earth System's models project that under ongoing greenhouse gas emissions as early as 2047, the Earth's near surface temperature could depart from the range of variability in the last 150 years.

Past events
Several periods of abrupt climate change have been identified in the paleoclimatic record.  Notable examples include:

About 25 climate shifts, called Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles, which have been identified in the ice core record during the glacial period over the past 100,000 years.
The Younger Dryas event, notably its sudden end. It is the most recent of the Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles and began 12,900 years ago and moved back into a warm-and-wet climate regime about 11,600 years ago.  It has been suggested that "the extreme rapidity of these changes in a variable that directly represents regional climate implies that the events at the end of the last glaciation may have been responses to some kind of threshold or trigger in the North Atlantic climate system." A model for this event based on disruption to the thermohaline circulation has been supported by other studies.
The Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum, timed at 55 million years ago, which may have been caused by the release of methane clathrates, although potential alternative mechanisms have been identified. This was associated with rapid ocean acidification
The Permian–Triassic Extinction Event, in which up to 95% of all species became extinct, has been hypothesized to be related to a rapid change in global climate. Life on land took 30 million years to recover.
The Carboniferous Rainforest Collapse occurred 300 million years ago, at which time tropical rainforests were devastated by climate change. The cooler, drier climate had a severe effect on the biodiversity of amphibians, the primary form of vertebrate life on land.
There are also abrupt climate changes associated with the catastrophic draining of glacial lakes. One example of this is the 8.2-kiloyear event, which is associated with the draining of Glacial Lake Agassiz. Another example is the Antarctic Cold Reversal, c. 14,500 years before present (BP), which is believed to have been caused by a meltwater pulse probably from either the Antarctic ice sheet or the Laurentide Ice Sheet. These rapid meltwater release events have been hypothesized as a cause for Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles.
A five-year study led by the Oxford School of Archaeology and additionally conducted by Royal Holloway, University of London, the Oxford University Museum of Natural History, and the National Oceanography Centre Southampton completed in 2013 called "Response of Humans to Abrupt Environmental Transitions" and referred to as "RESET" aimed to see if the hypothesis that humans have major development shifts during or immediately after abrupt climate changes with the aid of knowledge pulled from research on the palaeoenvironmental conditions, prehistoric archaeological history, oceanography, and volcanic geology of the last 130,000 years and across continents. It also aimed to predict possible human behavior in the event of climate change, and the timing of climate change.
A 2017 study concluded that similar conditions to today's Antarctic ozone hole (atmospheric circulation and hydroclimate changes), ~17,700 years ago, when stratospheric ozone depletion contributed to abrupt accelerated Southern Hemisphere deglaciation. The event coincidentally happened with an estimated 192-year series of massive volcanic eruptions, attributed to Mount Takahe in West Antarctica.

Possible precursors
Most abrupt climate shifts are likely due to sudden circulation shifts, analogous to a flood cutting a new river channel. The best-known examples are the several dozen shutdowns of the North Atlantic Ocean's Meridional Overturning Circulation during the last ice age, affecting climate worldwide.

The current warming of the Arctic, the duration of the summer season, is considered abrupt and massive.
Antarctic ozone depletion caused significant atmospheric circulation changes.
There have also been two occasions when the Atlantic's Meridional Overturning Circulation lost a crucial safety factor. The Greenland Sea flushing at 75 °N shut down in 1978, recovering over the next decade. Then the second-largest flushing site, the Labrador Sea, shut down in 1997 for ten years. While shutdowns overlapping in time have not been seen during the 50 years of observation, previous total shutdowns had severe worldwide climate consequences.
It has been postulated that teleconnections – oceanic and atmospheric processes on different timescales – connect both hemispheres during abrupt climate change.

Climate feedback effects
One source of abrupt climate change effects is a feedback process, in which a warming event causes a change that adds to further warming. The same can apply to cooling. Examples of such feedback processes are:

Ice–albedo feedback in which the advance or retreat of ice cover alters the albedo ("whiteness") of the earth and its ability to absorb the sun's energy.
Soil carbon feedback is the release of carbon from soils in response to global warming.
The dying and the burning of forests by global warming.
The probability of abrupt change for some climate related feedbacks may be low. Factors that may increase the probability of abrupt climate change include higher magnitudes of global warming, warming that occurs more rapidly and warming that is sustained over longer time periods.

Tipping points in the climate system
Possible tipping elements in the climate system include regional effects of climate change, some of which had abrupt onset and may therefore be regarded as abrupt climate change. Scientists have stated, "Our synthesis of present knowledge suggests that a variety of tipping elements could reach their critical point within this century under anthropogenic climate change".

Volcanism
Isostatic rebound in response to glacier retreat (unloading) and increased local salinity have been attributed to increased volcanic activity at the onset of the abrupt Bølling–Allerød warming. They are associated with the interval of intense volcanic activity, hinting at an interaction between climate and volcanism: enhanced short-term melting of glaciers, possibly via albedo changes from particle fallout on glacier surfaces.

Impacts
In the past, abrupt climate change has likely caused wide-ranging and severe impacts as follows:

Mass extinctions, most notably the Permian–Triassic extinction event (often referred colloquially to as the Great Dying) and the Carboniferous Rainforest Collapse, have been suggested as a consequence of abrupt climate change.
Loss of biodiversity: without interference from abrupt climate change and other extinction events, the biodiversity of Earth would continue to grow.
Sea ice decline in the North Atlantic and Nordic Seas, specifically in the Baffin Bay and Labrador Sea.
Changes in ocean circulation such as:
Increasing frequency of El Niño events
Potential disruption to the thermohaline circulation, such as that which may have occurred during the Younger Dryas event.
Changes to the North Atlantic oscillation
Changes in Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) which could contribute to more severe weather events.

================================================================================

# Adaptive capacity

Adaptive capacity relates to the capacity of systems, institutions, humans and other organisms to adjust to potential damage, to take advantage of opportunities, or to respond to consequences. In the context of ecosystems, adaptive capacity is the ability to maintain, recover, or adapt performance and function as climate conditions change. Species' adaptive capacity is generally characterized by phenotypic plasticity, dispersal
ability, and genetic diversity , which are foundational to the species' ability to acclimate in situ or track suitable climate across the landscape . In the context of coupled socio-ecological social systems, adaptive capacity is commonly associated with the following characteristics: Firstly, the ability of institutions and networks to learn, and store knowledge and experience. Secondly, the creative flexibility in decision making, transitioning and problem solving. And thirdly, the existence of power structures that are responsive and consider the needs of all stakeholders.
In the context of climate change adaptation, adaptive capacity depends on the inter-relationship of social, political, economic, technological and institutional factors operating at a variety of scales. Some of these are generic, and others are exposure-specific.

Benefits
Adaptive capacity confers resilience to perturbation, giving ecological and human social systems the ability to reconfigure themselves with minimum loss of function. In ecological systems, this resilience shows as net primary productivity and maintenance of biomass and biodiversity, and the stability of hydrological cycles. In human social systems it is demonstrated by the stability of social relations, the maintenance of social capital and economic prosperity.
Building adaptive capacity is particular important in the context of climate change, where it refers to a latent capacity - in terms of resources and assets - from which adaptations can be made as required depending on future circumstances. Since future climate is likely to be different from the present climate, developing adaptive capacity is a prerequisite for the adaptation that can reduce the potential negative effects of exposure to climate change. In climate change, adaptive capacity, along with hazard, exposure and vulnerability, is a key component that contributes to risk, or the potential for harm or impact.

Characteristics
Adaptive capacity can be enhanced in a number of different ways. A report by the Overseas Development Institute introduces the local adaptive capacity framework (LAC), featuring five core characteristics of adaptive capacity. These include:

Asset base: the availability of a diverse range of key livelihood assets that allow households or communities to respond to evolving circumstances
Institutions and entitlements: the existence of an appropriate and evolving institutional environment that allows for access and entitlement to key assets and capitals
Knowledge and information: the ability households and communities have to generate, receive, assess and disseminate knowledge and information in support of appropriate adaptation options
Innovation: the system creates an enabling environment to foster innovation, experimentation and the ability to explore niche solutions in order to take advantage of new opportunities
Flexible forward-looking decision-making and governance: the system is able to anticipate, incorporate and respond to changes with regards to its governance structures and future planning.
Many development interventions - such as social protection programmes and efforts to promote social safety nets - can play important roles in promoting aspects of adaptive capacity.

Relationship between adaptive capacity, states and strategies
Adaptive capacity is associated with r and K selection strategies in ecology and with a movement from explosive positive feedback to sustainable negative feedback loops in social systems and technologies.
The Resilience Alliance shows how the logistic curve of the r phase positive feedback, becoming replaced by the K negative feedback strategy is an important part of adaptive capacity.  The r strategy is associated with situations of low complexity, high resilience, and growing potential.  K strategies are associated with situations of high complexity, high potential and high resilience, but if the perturbations exceed certain limits, adaptive capacity may be exceeded and the system collapses into another so-called Omega state, of low potential, low complexity and low resilience.

In the context of climate change
Common enablers of adaptive capacity
An enabler, also known as a promoter or driver, represents a set of factors and conditions which can help to build and develop resilience. In a 2001 IPCC report focusing on impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability, six factors were identified as promoters of adaptive capacity. These characteristics contribute to the development and strengthening of adaptive capacity. For instance, a stable and prosperous economy is crucial, as it enables better management of the costs associated with adaptation. Generally, developed and wealthier nations are more prepared to face the impacts of climate change. Access to technology at various levels (local, regional, and national) and in all sectors is essential for staying informed about resource distribution, land use, and extraction practices. Additionally, clearly delineating roles and responsibilities for executing adaptation strategies is important at national, regional, and local levels. Discussion forums and consultations are established to disseminate climate information, ensuring clear communication and collaboration. Social institutions aim to distribute resources equitably, recognizing that power imbalances can hinder adaptive capacity. It's vital to protect existing systems with high adaptive capacity, such as traditional societies, from potential compromises resulting from modern development trajectories.

Common barriers of adaptive capacity
A barrier is an obstacle surmounted through collective efforts, creative management, mindset shifts, and adjustments in resource distribution, land uses, and institutions. Barriers are often confused with limits however, the distinguishing feature between the two is that limits cannot be overcome. Barriers are crucial to consider when assessing the level of adaptive capacity within a group, community, and organization, as they block or hinder adaptation actions. Various types of barriers including historical, political, financial, and natural can be identified. They can be either internal or external and can block or hinder the implementation of an adaptation action and consequently lower adaptive capacity. An external barrier is a factor that falls outside an organization/community/individual's control. For example, a common external barrier is the absence of land available for individuals or enterprises to relocate while faced with a major climatic event such as flooding or wildfires. An internal barrier is typically affected by an organization/community/individual beliefs and perceptions concerning climate change. For example, a common internal barrier is people's reluctance to relocate from flood-prone regions (owing to their livelihood dependence), the costs of land or property, or insufficient awareness regarding the potential flooding risks amid projected climate alterations.
Common organizational barriers include a disconnect between government recommendations/policies and concrete actions made by actors and organizations. Scholars point to other significant barriers that may impede adaptation action, like the lack of resources, financial incentives for long-term planning, and a lack of knowledge related to climate change adaptation. Another common barrier is skepticism regarding the severity and urgency of climate impacts. Local knowledge of technical, climate-adapted solutions is instrumental for organizational adaptation, but opportunities to harness this knowledge can be missed due to skeptical beliefs.

Darwinian natural selection
The evolutionary emergence of living systems likely included early replication of an RNA molecule, as described in the article RNA world.  Such an emerging RNA molecule may have been capable of the three mechanisms of Darwinian selection: heritability, variation of type, and differential reproductive output.  The fitness of such an RNA replicator (its per capita rate of increase) likely would have been a function of its intrinsic adaptive capacities determined by its nucleotide sequence, and the availability of resources.  The three primary adaptive capacities may have been: (1) replication with moderate fidelity, giving rise to heritability while allowing variation of type, (2) resistance to decay, and (3) acquisition of, and ability to process, resources.  These adaptive capacities would have functioned by means of the folded configurations of the RNA replicators determined by their nucleotide sequences.
================================================================================

# Afforestation

Afforestation is the establishment of a forest or stand of trees in an area where there was no recent tree cover. There are three types of afforestation: natural regeneration, agroforestry and tree plantations. Afforestation has many benefits. In the context of climate change, afforestation can be helpful for climate change mitigation through the route of carbon sequestration. Afforestation can also improve the local climate through increased rainfall and by being a barrier against high winds. The additional trees can also prevent or reduce topsoil erosion (from water and wind), floods and landslides. Finally, additional trees can be a habitat for wildlife, and provide employment and wood products.

In comparison, reforestation means re-establishing forest that have either been cut down or lost due to natural causes, such as fire, storm, etc. Nowadays, the boundaries between afforestation and reforestation projects can be blurred as it may not be so clear what was there before at what point in time.
An essential aspect of successful afforestation efforts lies in the careful selection of tree species that are well-suited to the local climate and soil conditions. By choosing appropriate species, afforested areas can better withstand the impacts of climate change.
Earth offers enough room to plant an additional 0.9 billion ha of tree canopy cover. Planting and protecting them would sequester 205 billion tons of carbon which is about 20 years of current global carbon emissions. This level of sequestration would represent about 25% of the atmosphere's current carbon pool. However, there has been debate about whether afforestation is beneficial for the sustainable use of natural resources, with some researchers pointing out that tree planting is not the only way to enhance climate mitigation and CO2 capture. Non-forest areas, such as grasslands and savannas, also benefit the biosphere and humanity, and they need a different management strategy - they are not supposed to be forests.
Afforestation critics argue that ecosystems without trees are not necessarily degraded, and many of them can store carbon as they are; for example, savannas and tundra store carbon underground. Carbon sequestration estimates in these areas often do not include the total amount of carbon reductions in soils and slowing tree growth over time. Afforestation can also negatively affect biodiversity by increasing fragmentation and edge effects on the habitat outside the planted area.
Australia, Canada, China, India, Israel, United States and Europe have afforestation programs to increase carbon dioxide removal in forests and in some cases to reduce desertification.

Definition
The term afforestation means establishing new forest on lands that were not forest before (e.g. abandoned agriculture). The same definition in other words states that afforestation is "conversion to forest of land that historically has not contained forests".
In comparison, reforestation means the "conversion to forest of land that has previously contained forests but that has been converted to some other use".

Types
There are three types of afforestation:

Natural regeneration (where native trees are planted as seeds; this creates new ecosystems and increases carbon sequestration).
Agroforestry (this is essentially an agricultural activity carried out in order to grow harvestable crops such as fruits and nuts).
Tree plantations (carried out in order to produce wood and wood-pulp products; this can be seen as an alternative to cutting down naturally occurring forests).
However, the term afforestation can also "imply the intentional conversion of native non-forest ecosystems to exotic tree cover and violate biodiversity safeguards".

Procedure
The process of afforestation begins with site selection. Several environmental factors of the site must be analyzed, including climate, soil, vegetation, and human activity. These factors will determine the quality of the site, what species of trees should be planted, and what planting method should be used.
After the forest site has been assessed, the area must be prepared for planting. Preparation can involve a variety of mechanical or chemical methods, such as chopping, mounding, bedding, herbicides, and prescribed burning. Once the site is prepared, planting can take place. One method for planting is direct seeding, which involves sowing seeds directly into the forest floor. Another is seedling planting, which is similar to direct seeding except that seedlings already have an established root system. Afforestation by cutting is an option for tree species that can reproduce asexually, where a piece of a tree stem, branch, root, or leaves can be planted onto the forest floor and sprout successfully. Sometimes special tools, such as a tree planting bar, are used to make planting of trees easier and faster.
An essential aspect of successful afforestation efforts lies in the careful selection of tree species that are well-suited to the local climate and soil conditions. By choosing appropriate species, afforested areas can better withstand the impacts of climate change.

Benefits
There are several benefits from afforestation such as carbon sequestration, increasing rainfall, prevention of topsoil erosion (from water and wind), flood and landslide mitigation, barriers against high winds, shelter for wildlife, employment and alternative sources of wood products.
Afforestation projects create employment opportunities, particularly in rural areas, thus promoting sustainable livelihoods. They can create many jobs in various forest-related activities.

Climate change mitigation
Environmental benefits
Afforestation provides other environmental benefits, including increasing the soil quality and its organic carbon levels, reducing the risk of erosion and desertification. The planting of trees in urban areas is also able to reduce air pollution via the trees' absorption and filtration of pollutants, including carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and ozone, in addition to CO2.
Afforestation protects the biodiversity of plants and animals which allows the sustenance of ecosystems that provide clean air, soil fertilization, etc. Forests support biodiversity conservation, providing habitats for about 80% of the world's biodiversity and contributing to ecosystem restoration and resilience. Water management can be improved afforestation, as trees regulate hydrological cycles, reduce soil erosion, and prevent water runoff. Their capacity to capture and store water helps in mitigating floods and droughts.
Forests act as natural air filters, absorbing pollutants and improving air quality. Urban forestation projects have been successful in reducing respiratory illnesses and enhancing overall air quality in cities. Trees provide shade and cooling effects. By shading and evaporation, forests can lower local temperatures, offering a more comfortable environment in urban areas and reducing the impact of extreme heat.

Criticism
Afforestation in grasslands and savanna
Tree-planting campaigns are criticised for sometimes targeting areas where forests would not naturally occur, such as grassland and savanna biomes. Carbon sequestration forecasts of afforestation programmes often insufficiently consider possible carbon reductions in soils as well as slowing tree growth over time.

Impact on biodiversity
Afforestation can negatively affect biodiversity through increasing fragmentation and edge effects for the habitat remaining outside the planted area. New forest plantations can introduce generalist predators that would otherwise not be found in open habitat into the covered area, which could detrimentally increase predation rates on the native species of the area. A study by scientists at the British Trust for Ornithology into the decline of British populations of Eurasian curlew found that afforestation had impacted curlew populations through fragmentation of their naturally open grassland habitats and increases in generalist predators.

Surface albedo
Questions have also been raised in the scientific community regarding how global afforestation could affect the surface albedo of Earth. The canopy cover of mature trees could make the surface albedo darker, which causes more heat to be absorbed, potentially raising the temperature of the planet. This is particularly relevant in parts of the world with high levels of snow cover, due to the more significant difference in albedo between highly reflective white snow and more darker forest cover which absorbs more solar radiation.

Monoculture
One significant criticism of reforestation or afforestation efforts that rely on monocultures of - usually conifer - trees is that, while they may increase tree cover, they fail to provide the diverse and complex habitat needed by most woodland creatures. Monocultures, often planted for commercial purposes or ease of management, lack the biodiversity of natural forests. These single-species forests provide limited food sources, shelter, and nesting sites for a wide range of wildlife, and in purely coniferous forests low levels of light may reach the forest floor reducing habitat and variety of plant life. Many woodland creatures, such as birds, mammals, and insects, rely on a variety of tree species and plant life for survival, and the uniformity of monocultures does not support these varied ecological needs. As a result, such reforestation or afforestation efforts may unintentionally create environments that are unsuitable for the very species they aim to protect, thus undermining broader conservation goals.

Examples
Africa
The Great Green Wall of Africa is a ~5,000 mile forest being planted across the continent to stop the spread of the Sahara Desert to the south.

Australia
In Adelaide, South Australia (a city of 1.3 million as of June 2016), Premier Mike Rann (2002 to 2011) launched an urban forest initiative in 2003 to plant 3 million native trees and shrubs by 2014 on 300 project sites across the metro area. Thousands of Adelaide citizens participated in community planting days on sites including parks, reserves, transport corridors, schools, water courses and coastline. Only native trees were planted to ensure genetic integrity. Rann said the project aimed to beautify and cool the city and make it more livable, improve air and water quality, and reduce Adelaide's greenhouse gas emissions by 600,000 tonnes of CO2 a year.

Canada
In 2003, the government of Canada created a four-year project called the Forest 2020 Plantation Development and Assessment Initiative, which involved planting 6000 ha of fast-growing forests on non-forested lands countrywide. These plantations were used to analyze how afforestation can help to increase carbon sequestration and mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions while also considering the economic and investment attractiveness of afforestation. The results of the initiative showed that although there is not enough available land in Canada to completely offset the country's GHG emissions, afforestation can be useful mitigation technique for meeting GHG emission goals, especially until permanent, more advanced carbon storage technology becomes available.
On 14 December 2020, Canada's Minister of Natural Resources Seamus O'Regan announced the federal government's investment of $3.16 billion to plant two billion trees over the next 10 years. This plan aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by an estimated 12 megatonnes by 2050.

China
Doubling of forest coverage between 1980 and 2021
China had the highest afforestation rate of any country or region in the world, with 4.77 million hectares (47,000 square kilometers) of afforestation in 2008. According to the 2021 government work report, forest coverage will reach 24 percent based on the main targets and tasks for the 14th Five-Year Plan period.
Tree-planting laws and school-children
A law in China from 1981 requires that every school student over the age of 11 plants at least one tree per year. 
Other

From 2011 to 2016, the city Dongying in Shandong province forested over 13,800 hectares of saline soil through the Shandong Ecological Afforestation Project, which was launched with support from the World Bank. In 2017, the Saihanba Afforestation Community won the UN Champions of the Earth Award in the Inspiration and Action category for "transforming degraded land into a lush paradise".
The successful afforestation of the Loess Plateau involved collaborative efforts by international and domestic professionals alongside villagers. Through this initiative, millions of villagers across four of China's poorest provinces were able to improve farming practices and increase incomes and employment, alleviating poverty. In addition, the careful selection of trees ensured a healthy, self-sustainable ecosystem between tree and soil which facilitated a net carbon sink. The Loess Plateau, although successful, was costly, reaching almost US$500 million.
This contrasts with more recent initiatives where the results have not been as favorable. In an attempt to make afforestation both low-cost and less time-consuming, China shifted towards monoculture of mostly red pine trees. However, this did not adequately take into consideration environmental structure and led to increased soil erosion, desertification, sand/dust storms and short-lived trees. This has reduced China's environmental sustainability index (ESI) to one of the lowest in the world.
Regarding the effects of afforestation on long-term carbon stocks and carbon sequestration these decrease when trees are less than 5 years old and increase quickly thereafter. This means trees from monoculture planting that do not survive never reach full potential for carbon sequestration to offset China's carbon output. Overall, there is a possibility for afforestation to balance carbon levels and aid carbon neutrality, but several challenges still remain which hinder an all encompassing effort.
The Chinese government requires mining companies to restore the environment around exhausted mines by refilling excavated pits and planting crops or trees. Many mining companies use these recovered mines for ecotourism business.

European Union
Europe deforested more than half of its forested areas over the last 6000 years. The European Union (EU) has paid farmers for afforestation since 1990, offering grants to turn farmland into forest and payments for the management of forest. As part of the Green Deal, the EU program "3 Billion Tree Planting Pledge by 2030" provides direction on afforestation of previous farmland in addition to reforestation.   
According to Food and Agriculture Organization statistics, Spain had the third fastest afforestation rate in Europe in the 1990–2005 period, after Iceland and Ireland. In those years, a total of 44,360 square kilometers were afforested, and the total forest cover rose from 13.5 to 17.9 million hectares. In 1990, forests covered 26.6% of the Spanish territory. As of 2007, that figure had risen to 36.6%. Spain today has the fifth largest forest area in the European Union.

India
As of 2023 the total forest and tree cover in India was 22%. The forests of India are grouped into 5 major categories and 16 types based on biophysical criteria. 38% of the forest is categorized as subtropical dry deciduous and 30% as tropical moist deciduous and other smaller groups.
In 2016 the Indian government passed the CAMPA (Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority) law, allowing about 40 thousand crores rupees (almost $6 Billion) to go to Indian states for planting trees. The funds were to be used for treatment of catchment areas, assisted natural generation, forest management, wildlife protection and management, relocation of villages from protected areas, management of human-wildlife conflicts, training and awareness generation, supply of wood saving devices and allied activities. Increasing the tree cover would also help in creating additional carbon sinks to meet the nation's Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent through additional forest and tree cover by 2030 - part of India's efforts to combat climate change. 
In 2016 the Maharashtra government planted almost 20,000,000 saplings and pledged to plant another 30,000,000 the following year. In 2019, 220 million trees were planted in a single day in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh.

Israel
With wood production as a main objective, monocultures of Aleppo pine were vigorously planted between 1948 and the 1970s. Following a massive collapse of this species in the 1990s, due to attacks by the insect pine blast scale, the Aleppo pine was gradually replaced by Pinus brutia. Since the 1990s there has been a trend towards more ecological approaches planting mixed forests combining pines with broadleaf Mediterranean species e.g. oak, pistachio, carob, olive, arbutus and buckthorn. About 250 million trees have been planted through the JNF across Israel since 1990. Tree coverage increased from 2% in 1948 to over 8% at present.

Japan
United Kingdom
In January 2013, the UK government set a target of 12% woodland cover in England by 2060, up from the then 10%. In Wales the National Assembly for Wales has set a target of 19% woodland cover, up from 15%. Government-backed initiatives such as the Woodland Carbon Code are intended to support this objective by encouraging corporations and landowners to create new woodland to offset their carbon emissions.

Scotland
Charitable groups such as Trees for Life (Scotland) contribute to afforestation and reforestation efforts in the UK.

United States
In the 1800s people moving westward in the US encountered the Great Plains – land with fertile soil, a growing population and a demand for timber but with few trees to supply it. So tree planting was encouraged along homesteads. Arbor Day was founded in 1872 by Julius Sterling Morton in Nebraska City. By the 1930s the Dust Bowl environmental disaster signified a reason for adding significant new tree cover. Public works programs under the New Deal saw the planting of 18,000 miles of windbreaks stretching from North Dakota to Texas to fight soil erosion (see Great Plains Shelterbelt).

See also

Buffer strip – Land management technique
Forestry – Science and craft of managing woodlands
Silviculture – Practice of controlling forests for timber production
Windbreak – Rows of trees or shrubs planted to provide shelter from the wind

== References ==

================================================================================

# Sea surface temperature

Sea surface temperature (or ocean surface temperature) is the temperature of ocean water close to the surface. The exact meaning of surface varies in the literature and in practice. It is usually between 1 millimetre (0.04 in) and 20 metres (70 ft) below the sea surface. Sea surface temperatures greatly modify air masses in the Earth's atmosphere within a short distance of the shore. The thermohaline circulation has a major impact on average sea surface temperature throughout most of the world's oceans. 
Warm sea surface temperatures can develop and strengthen cyclones over the ocean. Tropical cyclones can also cause a cool wake. This is due to turbulent mixing of the upper 30 metres (100 ft) of the ocean. Sea surface temperature changes during the day. This is like the air above it, but to a lesser degree. There is less variation in sea surface temperature on breezy days than on calm days. 
Coastal sea surface temperatures can cause offshore winds to generate upwelling, which can significantly cool or warm nearby landmasses, but shallower waters over a continental shelf are often warmer. Onshore winds can cause a considerable warm-up even in areas where upwelling is fairly constant, such as the northwest coast of South America. Coastal sea surface temperature values are important within numerical weather prediction as the sea surface temperature influences the atmosphere above, such as in the formation of sea breezes and sea fog. 
It is very likely that global mean sea surface temperature increased by 0.88 °C between 1850–1900 and 2011–2020 due to global warming, with most of that warming (0.60 °C) occurring between 1980 and 2020. The temperatures over land are rising faster than ocean temperatures. This is because the ocean absorbs about 90% of excess heat generated by climate change.

Definitions
Sea surface temperature (SST), or ocean surface temperature, is the water temperature close to the ocean's surface. The exact meaning of surface varies according to the measurement method used, but it is between 1 millimetre (0.04 in) and 20 metres (70 ft) below the sea surface. 
For comparison, the sea surface skin temperature relates to the top 20 or so micrometres of the ocean's surface.
The definition proposed by Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) for sea surface temperature does not specify the number of metres but focuses more on measurement techniques: Sea surface temperature is "the subsurface bulk temperature in the top few metres of the ocean, measured by ships, buoys and drifters. [...] Satellite measurements of skin temperature (uppermost layer; a micrometre thick) in the infrared or the top centimetre or so in the microwave are also used, but must be adjusted to be compatible with the bulk temperature." 
The temperature further below that is called ocean temperature or deeper ocean temperature. Ocean temperatures (more than 20 metres below the surface) also vary by region and time, and they contribute to variations in ocean heat content and ocean stratification. The increase of both ocean surface temperature and deeper ocean temperature is an important effect of climate change on oceans.

Extent of "surface"
The extent of the ocean surface down into the ocean is influenced by the amount of mixing that takes place between the surface water and the deeper water. This depends on the temperature: in the tropics the warm surface layer of about 100 m is quite stable and does not mix much with deeper water, while near the poles winter cooling and storms makes the surface layer denser and it mixes to great depth and then stratifies again in summer. This is why there is no simple single depth for ocean surface. The photic depth of the ocean is typically about 100 m and is related to this heated surface layer. It can be up to around 200 m deep in the open ocean.

Variations and changes
Local variations
The sea surface temperature (SST) has a diurnal range, just like the Earth's atmosphere above, though to a lesser degree due to its greater thermal inertia. On calm days, the temperature can vary by 6 °C (10 °F). The temperature of the ocean at depth lags the Earth's atmosphere temperature by 15 days per 10 metres (33 ft), which means for locations like the Aral Sea, temperatures near its bottom reach a maximum in December and a minimum in May and June. Near the coastline, some offshore and longshore winds move the warm waters near the surface offshore, and replace them with cooler water from below in the process known as Ekman transport. This pattern generally increases nutrients for marine life in the region, and can have a profound effect in some regions where the bottom waters are particularly nutrient-rich. Offshore of river deltas, freshwater flows over the top of the denser seawater, which allows it to heat faster due to limited vertical mixing.  Remotely sensed SST can be used to detect the surface temperature signature due to tropical cyclones. In general, an SST cooling is observed after the passing of a hurricane, primarily as the result of mixed layer deepening and surface heat losses. In the wake of several day long Saharan dust outbreaks across the adjacent northern Atlantic Ocean, sea surface temperatures are reduced 0.2 C to 0.4 C (0.3 to 0.7 F). Other sources of short-term SST fluctuation include extratropical cyclones, rapid influxes of glacial fresh water and concentrated phytoplankton blooms due to seasonal cycles or agricultural run-off.
The tropical ocean has been warming faster than other regions since 1950, with the greatest rates of warming in the tropical Indian Ocean, western Pacific Ocean, and western boundary currents of the subtropical gyres. However, the eastern Pacific Ocean, subtropical North Atlantic Ocean, and Southern Ocean have warmed more slowly than the global average or have experienced cooling since the 1950s.

Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation
Ocean currents, such as the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation, can affect sea surface temperatures over several decades. The Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) is an important driver of North Atlantic SST and Northern Hemisphere climate, but the mechanisms controlling AMO variability remain poorly understood. Atmospheric internal variability, changes in ocean circulation, or anthropogenic drivers may control the multidecadal temperature variability associated with AMO. These changes in North Atlantic SST may influence winds in the subtropical North Pacific and produce warmer SSTs in the western Pacific Ocean.

Regional variations
El Niño is defined by prolonged differences in Pacific Ocean surface temperatures when compared with the average value. The accepted definition is a warming or cooling of at least 0.5 °C (0.9 °F) averaged over the east-central tropical Pacific Ocean. Typically, this anomaly happens at irregular intervals of 2–7 years and lasts nine months to two years. The average period length is 5 years. When this warming or cooling occurs for only seven to nine months, it is classified as El Niño/La Niña "conditions"; when it occurs for more than that period, it is classified as El Niño/La Niña "episodes".
The sign of an El Niño in the sea surface temperature pattern is when warm water spreads from the west Pacific and the Indian Ocean to the east Pacific. It takes the rain with it, causing extensive drought in the western Pacific and rainfall in the normally dry eastern Pacific. El Niño's warm rush of nutrient-poor tropical water, heated by its eastward passage in the Equatorial Current, replaces the cold, nutrient-rich surface water of the Humboldt Current. When El Niño conditions last for many months, extensive ocean warming and the reduction in Easterly Trade winds limits upwelling of cold nutrient-rich deep water and its economic impact to local fishing for an international market can be serious.

Among scientists, there is medium confidence that the tropical Pacific will transition to a mean pattern resembling that of El Niño on centennial time scale, but there is still high uncertainty in tropical Pacific SST projections because it is difficult to capture El Niño variability in climate models.

Recent increase due to climate change
Overall, scientists project that all regions of the oceans will warm by 2050, but models disagree for SST changes expected in the subpolar North Atlantic, the equatorial Pacific, and the Southern Ocean. The future global mean SST increase for the period 1995-2014 to 2081-2100 is 0.86 °C under the most modest greenhouse gas emissions scenarios, and up to 2.89 °C under the most severe emissions scenarios.
A study published in 2025 in Environmental Research Letters reported that global mean sea surface temperature increases had more than quadrupled, from 0.06 K per decade during 1985–89 to 0.27 K per decade for 2019–23. The researchers projected that the increase inferred over the past 40 years would likely be exceeded within the next 20 years.

Measurement
There are a variety of techniques for measuring this parameter that can potentially yield different results because different things are actually being measured. Away from the immediate sea surface, general temperature measurements are accompanied by a reference to the specific depth of measurement. This is because of significant differences encountered between measurements made at different depths, especially during the daytime when low wind speed and high sunshine conditions may lead to the formation of a warm layer at the ocean's surface and strong vertical temperature gradients (a diurnal thermocline). Sea surface temperature measurements are confined to the top portion of the ocean, known as the near-surface layer.

Thermometers
The sea surface temperature was one of the first oceanographic variables to be measured. Benjamin Franklin suspended a mercury thermometer from a ship while travelling between the United States and Europe in his survey of the Gulf Stream in the late eighteenth century. SST was later measured by dipping a thermometer into a bucket of water that was manually drawn from the sea surface. The first automated technique for determining SST was accomplished by measuring the temperature of water in the intake port of large ships, which was underway by 1963. These observations have a warm bias of around 0.6 °C (1 °F) due to the heat of the engine room.  
Fixed weather buoys measure the water temperature at a depth of 3 metres (9.8 ft). Measurements of SST have had inconsistencies over the last 130 years due to the way they were taken. In the nineteenth century, measurements were taken in a bucket off a ship. However, there was a slight variation in temperature because of the differences in buckets. Samples were collected in either a wood or an uninsulated canvas bucket, but the canvas bucket cooled quicker than the wood bucket. The sudden change in temperature between 1940 and 1941 was the result of an undocumented change in procedure. The samples were taken near the engine intake because it was too dangerous to use lights to take measurements over the side of the ship at night. 
Many different drifting buoys exist around the world that vary in design, and the location of reliable temperature sensors varies. These measurements are beamed to satellites for automated and immediate data distribution. A large network of coastal buoys in U.S. waters is maintained by the National Data Buoy Center (NDBC). Between 1985 and 1994, an extensive array of moored and drifting buoys was deployed across the equatorial Pacific Ocean designed to help monitor and predict the El Niño phenomenon.

Weather satellites
Weather satellites have been available to determine sea surface temperature information since 1967, with the first global composites created during 1970. Since 1982, satellites have been increasingly utilized to measure SST and have allowed its spatial and temporal variation to be viewed more fully. Satellite measurements of SST are in reasonable agreement with in situ temperature measurements.  The satellite measurement is made by sensing the ocean radiation in two or more wavelengths within the infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum or other parts of the spectrum which can then be empirically related to SST. These wavelengths are chosen because they are:

within the peak of the blackbody radiation expected from the Earth, and
able to transmit adequately well through the atmosphere
The satellite-measured SST provides both a synoptic view of the ocean and a high frequency of repeat views, allowing the examination of basin-wide upper ocean dynamics not possible with ships or buoys. NASA's (National Aeronautic and Space Administration) Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) SST satellites have been providing global SST data since 2000, available with a one-day lag. NOAA's GOES (Geostationary Orbiting Earth Satellites) Archived 2020-08-17 at the Wayback Machine satellites are geo-stationary above the Western Hemisphere which enables them to deliver SST data on an hourly basis with only a few hours of lag time.
There are several difficulties with satellite-based absolute SST measurements. First, in infrared remote sensing methodology the radiation emanates from the top "skin" of the ocean, approximately the top 0.01 mm or less, which may not represent the bulk temperature of the upper meter of ocean due primarily to effects of solar surface heating during the daytime, reflected radiation, as well as sensible heat loss and surface evaporation. All these factors make it somewhat difficult to compare satellite data to measurements from buoys or shipboard methods, complicating ground truth efforts.  Secondly, the satellite cannot look through clouds, creating a cool bias in satellite-derived SSTs within cloudy areas.  However, passive microwave techniques can accurately measure SST and penetrate cloud cover.  Within atmospheric sounder channels on weather satellites, which peak just above the ocean's surface, knowledge of the sea surface temperature is important to their calibration.

Importance to the Earth's atmosphere
Sea surface temperature affects the behavior of the Earth's atmosphere above, so their initialization into atmospheric models is important. While sea surface temperature is important for tropical cyclogenesis, it is also important in determining the formation of sea fog and sea breezes. Heat from underlying warmer waters can significantly modify an air mass over distances as short as 35 kilometres (22 mi) to 40 kilometres (25 mi).  For example, southwest of Northern Hemisphere extratropical cyclones, curved cyclonic flow bringing cold air across relatively warm water bodies can lead to narrow lake-effect snow (or sea effect) bands. Those bands bring strong localized precipitation, often in the form of snow, since large water bodies such as lakes efficiently store heat that results in significant temperature differences—larger than 13 °C (23 °F)—between the water surface and the air above. Because of this temperature difference, warmth and moisture are transported upward, condensing into vertically oriented clouds which produce snow showers. The temperature decrease with height and cloud depth are directly affected by both the water temperature and the large-scale environment. The stronger the temperature decrease with height, the taller the clouds get, and the greater the precipitation rate becomes.

Tropical cyclones
Ocean temperature of at least 26.5°C (79.7°F) spanning through at minimum a 50-metre depth is one of the precursors needed to maintain a tropical cyclone (a type of mesocyclone).  These warm waters are needed to maintain the warm core that fuels tropical systems. This value is well above 16.1 °C (60.9 °F), the long term global average surface temperature of the oceans. However, this requirement can be considered only a general baseline because it assumes that the ambient atmospheric environment surrounding an area of disturbed weather presents average conditions. Tropical cyclones have intensified when SSTs were slightly below this standard temperature.
Tropical cyclones are known to form even when normal conditions are not met. For example, cooler air temperatures at a higher altitude (e.g., at the 500 hPa level, or 5.9 km) can lead to tropical cyclogenesis at lower water temperatures, as a certain lapse rate is required to force the atmosphere to be unstable enough for convection. In a moist atmosphere, this lapse rate is 6.5 °C/km, while in an atmosphere with less than 100% relative humidity, the required lapse rate is 9.8 °C/km.
At the 500 hPa level, the air temperature averages −7 °C (18 °F) within the tropics, but air in the tropics is normally dry at this height, giving the air room to wet-bulb, or cool as it moistens, to a more favorable temperature that can then support convection. A wet-bulb temperature at 500 hPa in a tropical atmosphere of −13.2 °C (8.2 °F) is required to initiate convection if the water temperature is 26.5 °C (79.7 °F), and this temperature requirement increases or decreases proportionally by 1 °C in the sea surface temperature for each 1 °C change at 500 hpa.
Inside a cold cyclone, 500 hPa temperatures can fall as low as −30 °C (−22 °F), which can initiate convection even in the driest atmospheres. This also explains why moisture in the mid-levels of the troposphere, roughly at the 500 hPa level, is normally a requirement for development. However, when dry air is found at the same height, temperatures at 500 hPa need to be even colder as dry atmospheres require a greater lapse rate for instability than moist atmospheres. At heights near the tropopause, the 30-year average temperature (as measured in the period encompassing 1961 through 1990) was −77 °C (−132 °F). One example of a tropical cyclone maintaining itself over cooler waters was Epsilon late in the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season.

================================================================================

# Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI, acronym pronounced  HOO-ee) is a private, nonprofit research and higher education facility dedicated to the study of marine science and engineering.
Established in 1930 in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, it is the largest independent oceanographic research institution in the U.S., with staff and students numbering about 1,000.

Constitution
The institution is organized into six departments, the Cooperative Institute for Climate and Ocean Research, and a marine policy center. Its shore-based facilities are located in the village of Woods Hole, Massachusetts, United States and a mile and a half away on the Quissett Campus. The bulk of the institution's funding comes from grants and contracts from the National Science Foundation and other government agencies, augmented by foundations and private donations.
WHOI scientists, engineers, and students collaborate to develop theories, test ideas, build seagoing instruments, and collect data in diverse marine environments. Ships operated by WHOI carry research scientists throughout the world's oceans. The WHOI fleet includes two large research vessels (Atlantis and Neil Armstrong), the coastal craft Tioga, small research craft such as the dive-operation work boat Echo, the deep-diving human-occupied submersible Alvin, the tethered, remotely operated vehicle Jason/Medea, and autonomous underwater vehicles such as the REMUS and SeaBED.
WHOI offers graduate and post-doctoral studies in marine science. There are several fellowship and training programs, and graduate degrees are awarded through a joint program with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). WHOI is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges. WHOI also offers public outreach programs and informal education through its Exhibit Center and summer tours. The institution has a volunteer program and a membership program, WHOI Associate.
WHOI shares a library, the MBLWHOI Library, with the Marine Biological Laboratory. The MBLWHOI Library holds print and electronic collections in the biological, biomedical, ecological, and oceanographic sciences. The library also conducts digitization, data preservation and informatics projects.
On October 1, 2020, Peter B. de Menocal became the institution's eleventh president and director.

History
In 1927, a National Academy of Sciences committee concluded that it was time to "consider the share of the United States of America in a worldwide program of oceanographic research." The committee's recommendation for establishing a permanent independent research laboratory on the East Coast to "prosecute oceanography in all its branches" led to the founding in 1930 of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
A $2.5 million grant from the Rockefeller Foundation supported the summer work of a dozen scientists, construction of a laboratory building and commissioning of a research vessel, the 142-foot (43 m) ketch Atlantis, whose profile still forms the institution's logo.
WHOI grew substantially to support significant defense-related research during World War II, and later began a steady growth in staff, research fleet, and scientific stature. From 1950 to 1956, the director was Dr. Edward "Iceberg" Smith, an Arctic explorer, oceanographer and retired Coast Guard rear admiral.
In 1977 the institution appointed oceanographer John Steele as director, and he served until his retirement in 1989.
On 1 September 1985, a joint French-American expedition led by Jean-Louis Michel of IFREMER and Robert Ballard of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution identified the location of the wreck of RMS Titanic, which sank off the coast of Newfoundland 15 April 1912.
On 3 April 2011, within a week of resuming of the search operation for Air France Flight 447, a team led by WHOI, operating full ocean depth autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) owned by the Waitt Institute discovered, by means of sidescan sonar, a large portion of debris field from flight AF447.

In March 2017 the institution effected an open-access policy to make its research publicly accessible online.
In 2019, iDefense reported that China's hackers had launched cyberattacks on dozens of academic institutions in an attempt to gain information on technology being developed for the United States Navy. Some of the targets included the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. The attacks had been underway since at least April 2017.
In August 2024, institution researchers are scheduled, pending approval from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, to conduct a $10 million ocean alkalinity enhancement experiment partially funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that will release 6,000 gallons of a liquid solution of sodium hydroxide into the ocean 10 miles south of Martha's Vineyard in an attempt to remove 20 metric tons of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.

Military contracting
The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution develops technology for the United States Navy, including ocean battlespace sensors, unmanned undersea vehicles, and acoustic navigation and communication systems for operations in the Arctic. The institution is also working on Project Sundance for the Office of Naval Research.

Awards issued
B. H. Ketchum Award
The B. H. Ketchum award, established in 1983, is presented for innovative coastal/nearshore research and is named in honor of oceanographer Bostwick H. "Buck" Ketchum. The award is administered by the WHOI Coastal Ocean Institute and Rinehart Coastal Research Center.
Recipients:

2017: Don Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
2015: Candace Oviatt, Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island
2010: James E. Cloern, United States Geological Survey
2007: Richard Garvine, University of Delaware
2003: John Farrington, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
2003: Nancy Rabalais, Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium
1999: Willard Moore, University of South Carolina
1996: Ronald Smith, Loughbororugh University
1995: Christopher Martens, University of North Carolina
1992: Scott Nixon, University of Rhode Island
1990: Daniel Lynch, Dartmouth College
1989: William Boicourt, University of Maryland
1988: Alasdair McIntyre, Aberdeen University (Emeritus)
1986: John S. Allen, Oregon State University
1985: Thomas H. Pearson, Oban, Argyll, Scotland
1985: Michael Moore, Plymouth, UK
1984: Edward D. Goldberg, Scripps Institution of Oceanography

Henry Bryant Bigelow Medal in Oceanography
The Henry Bryant Bigelow Medal in Oceanography was established in 1960 in honor of the first WHOI Director, biologist Henry Bryant Bigelow.
Recipients: Source:

2004 David M. Karl (Professor of Oceanography, University of Hawaii) – for "his contributions to microbial oceanography, especially the development and leadership of long-term, integrated studies of chemical, physical, and biological variations in oceanic environments."
1996 Bill J. Jenkins (Senior Scientist, Marine Chemistry & Geochemistry, WHOI) – for "his outstanding contributions to the development of the tritium-helium dating technique and its application to problems in ocean physics and biology and geochemistry, as well as his exceptional character and selfless dedication to the advance of science at WHOI."
1993 Robert Weller (Senior Scientist, Physical Oceanography; Director, CICOR; WHOI)
1992 Alice Louise Alldredge (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Mary Wilcox Silver (University of California, Santa Cruz) – for "their creative contributions to biological and chemical oceanography, particularly in demonstrating the importance of 'marine snow' as a major contributor to the vertical flux of particulate matter throughout the worlds oceans."
1988 Hans Thomas Rossby (University of Rhode Island) and Douglas Chester Webb (Webb Research) – for "Their creative contributions to ocean technology and oceanography, particularly in the development of the SOFAR float and advancing out knowledge of Lagrangian ocean dynamics."
1984 Arnold L. Gordon (Columbia University) for his "dedication in completing the Antarctic Circumpolar Survey"
1980 Holger W. Jannasch (WHOI) – for his "creative contributions to marine microbiology by providing us with an understanding of the fundamentals of microbial processes in the sea and the dynamics of oceanic food chains."
1979 Wolfgang Helmut Berger (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego) – for his "creative contributions to paleoceanography by opening the doors of perception on the controlling factors governing carbonate sedimentation in the oceans, and for providing us with a unifying conceptual model for interpreting the geological evolution of ocean basins."
1974 Henry M. Stommel (WHOI)
1970 Frederick J. Vine (WHOI) – In recognition of his "imaginative and sound contributions to man's understanding of the formative processes active within the earth."
1966 Columbus O'D. Iselin (WHOI)
1964 Bruce C. Heezen (WHOI)
1962 John C. Swallow (WHOI)
1960 Henry Bryant Bigelow

Scientists
Over the years, WHOI scientists have made seminal discoveries about the ocean that have contributed to improving US commerce, health, national security, and quality of life. They have received awards and recognition from scientific societies such as The Oceanography Society, the American Geophysical Union, Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography, and several others.
Notable scientists include:

Amy Bower, senior scientist, blind oceanographer
Stan Hart, scientist emeritus, William Bowie Medal recipient
Elizabeth Kujawinski, American oceanographer, Woods Hole Senior Scientist
Loral O'Hara, research engineer, NASA astronaut
Christopher Reddy, senior scientist, oil spill researcher
Alfred C. Redfield (1890 – 1983), oceanographer. Discovered the Redfield ratio and served as WHOI senior biologist from 1930 to 1942, and associate director between 1942 and 1957. The Institute's Redfield Laboratory was named in his honor in 1971.
Mary Sears, senior scientist in marine biology who served at the Naval Hydrographic Office in World War II compiling oceanographic intelligence for the Pacific Campaign
Heidi Sosik, senior scientist in Biology, inventor
Klaus Hasselmann, Doherty Professor at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution from 1970 to 1972
Robert Ballard, oceanographer, retired US Navy officer, explorer and maritime archeologist who found the wreck of the Titanic
Lisan Yu – known for serving on the Earth Science Advisory Committee (ESAC), and on the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) committee of NASA.

Research fleet
Ships
WHOI operates several research vessels, owned by the United States Navy, the National Science Foundation, or the institution:

R/V Atlantis (AGOR-25) – 274 feet long, mothership of the Alvin submarine
R/V Tioga (WHOI-owned) – 60 feet long
R/V Neil Armstrong (AGOR-27) – 238 feet long
WHOI formerly operated R/V Knorr, which was replaced by R/V Neil Armstrong in 2015.

Small boat fleet
WHOI operates many small boats used in inland harbors, ponds, rivers, and coastal bays. All are owned by the institution itself.

Motorboat Echo – 29 feet long (mainly used as a work boat to support dive operations, also the newest small research craft at WHOI)
Motorboat Mytilus – 24 feet long (mainly used in water too shallow for larger craft and is a versatile coastal research boat)
Motorboat Calanus – 21 feet long (mainly used in local water bodies such as Great Harbor, Vineyard Sound and Buzzards Bay)
Motorboat Limulus – 13 feet long (mainly used to shuttle equipment to larger craft and as a work platform for near-shore research tasks)
Rowboat Orzrus – 12 feet long (mainly used in harbors and ponds where motor craft are not permitted)

Underwater vehicles
WHOI also has developed numerous underwater autonomous and remotely operated vehicles for research:

Alvin (DSV-2) – human-occupied vehicle, the institution's most well-known equipment
Deepsea Challenger – human-occupied vehicle designed, field-tested, and later donated to the WHOI by Canadian film director James Cameron
Jason – a remotely operated vehicle (ROV)
Sentry – an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) and successor to ABE
Nereus – A hybrid remotely operated vehicle (HROV); lost on 5/10/14 while exploring the Kermadec Trench.
Remus – Remote Environment Monitoring UnitS, a family of autonomous underwater vehicles
Mesobot - an autonomous underwater vehicle built to track sea life in the mesopelagic zone
SeaBED – an autonomous underwater vehicle optimized for high-resolution seafloor imaging
Spray Glider – a remotely operated vehicle, used to collect data about the salinity, temperature, etc. about an area
Slocum Glider – another remotely operated vehicle, with functions similar to the functions of the Spray Glider
CAMPER – a towed vehicle used to collect samples from the seabed of the Arctic Ocean
Seasoar – a submarine towed by a ship
TowCam – a submarine with cameras that is towed by a ship along the ocean floor to take photographs
Video Plankton Recorder – a submarine with microscopic camera systems, towed along by a ship to take videos of plankton
Autonomous Benthic Explorer (ABE) – an autonomous underwater vehicle

See also
52-hertz whale
Liquid Jungle Lab, a tropical research station in Pacific Panama operated by WHOI
Marine Biological Laboratory, a neighboring but administratively unrelated institution in Woods Hole
The Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences, a smaller oceanographic facility located at Rutgers University in New Jersey
Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute, a similar research facility associated with Florida Atlantic University and located in Fort Pierce, Florida
Hatfield Marine Science Center, a similar research facility associated with the Oregon State University and located in Newport, Oregon
Hopkins Marine Station, a similar research facility run by Stanford University in Monterey, California
Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, a multi-campus marine research consortium of the California State University System
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, a similar research facility associated with the University of California, San Diego and located in La Jolla, California
Ocean Frontier Institute, an ocean research centre located in Halifax, Canada

References
External links
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

================================================================================

# Acoustically Navigated Geological Underwater Survey

The Acoustically Navigated Geological Underwater Survey (ANGUS) was a deep-towed still-camera sled operated by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) in the early 1970s. It was the first unmanned research vehicle made by WHOI. ANGUS was encased in a large 12-foot (3.7 m) steel frame designed to explore rugged volcanic terrain and able to withstand high impact collisions. It was fitted with three 35 mm color cameras with 400 feet (120 m) of film. Together, its three cameras were able to photograph a strip of the sea floor with a width up to 200 feet (61 m). Each camera was equipped with strobe lights allowing them to photograph the ocean floor from 35 to 50 feet (11 to 15 m) above. On the bottom of the body was a downward-facing sonar system to monitor the sled's height above the ocean floor. It was capable of working in depths up to 20,000 feet (6,100 m) and could therefore reach roughly 98% of the sea floor. ANGUS could remain in the deep ocean for work sessions of 12 to 14 hours at a time, taking up to 16,000 photographs in one session. ANGUS was often used to scout locations of interest to later be explored and sampled by other vehicles such as Argo or Alvin.
ANGUS has been used to search for and photograph underground geysers and the creatures living near them, and it was equipped with a heat sensor to alert the tether-ship when it passed over one. It was used on expeditions such as Project FAMOUS (French-American Mid Ocean Undersea Study 1973–1974), the Discovery expedition with Argo to survey the wreckage of the Titanic. (1985), and again in the return mission to the Titanic (1986). ANGUS was the only ROV used on both dives to the Titanic.
On Project FAMOUS, ANGUS helped change scientists' views of the ocean floor. It showed them how different geological formations and chemical compositions of sediments can be, disproving previous assumptions of ocean floor uniformity  The project also provided new insight to the theory of seafloor spreading by observing and sampling the rock formations around ridges and the horizontal formation of layers parallel to the ridge.
In another 1977 expedition with ANGUS, scientists monitored temperatures over the ocean floor for any fluctuation. It was not until late at night the crew noticed temperatures rise drastically. They would review the photograph footage taken after the vehicle's session. ANGUS provided the first photographic evidence for hydrothermal vents and black smokers. It had returned with over 3000 colored photos showing both vents as well as colonies of clams and other organisms. They would later return with Alvin to take samples.
Scientists nicknamed ANGUS Dope on a rope  due to its durability and lack of fragile sensors. It was also given the motto "takes a lickin' but it keeps on clickin'". ANGUS was retired in the late 1980s, having completed over 250 voyages.

References
External links
Project FAMOUS: Exploring the Mid-Atlantic Ridge

================================================================================

# Alice Alldredge

Alice Louise Alldredge (February 1, 1949) is an American oceanographer and marine biologist who studies marine snow, carbon cycling, microbes and plankton in the ecology of the ocean. She has been one of the most cited scientific researchers since 2003.

Early life and education
Alldredge was born in 1949 in Denver, Colorado, USA. She graduated from Merrit Hutton High School in Thornton, Colorado, and completed an undergraduate degree in biology at Carleton College in 1971. Her father was an inspiration to her interest in science and her mother was a role-model as well.

Career
Alldredge continued her education to earn a PhD in 1975 from the University of California, Davis. Between 1975 and 1976, she studied at the Australian Institute of Marine Science as a NATO Postdoctoral Fellow. She joined the faculty of the University of California, Santa Barbara in 1976 and has conducted research on ocean ecology.
Alldredge has conducted research in the open sea, at her laboratory at the University of California, Santa Barbara as well as in collaboration with the Long Term Ecological Research Network (LTER) at the Mo'orea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological Research Site (MCR LTER) in Mo'orea, French Polynesia. 
Alldredge discovered the existence of abundant gel particles called Transparent Exopolymer
Particles (TEP) and demersal zooplankton, describing their migration and dispersion throughout coral reefs, seagrass meadows, and tidal sandflats. She is an authority on marine snow, the particles which settle to the bottom of the oceans, and the cycling in the sea of carbon.  Through her work on marine snow, Alldredge changed the understanding of particle flux and she made the first quantification of observed sinking rates of marine snow, "showing that marine snow sinks rapidly enough to deliver significant amounts of organic carbon to the deep [sea]". Alice Alldredge also discovered that copepods in the marine food web were using larvacean houses as a primary food source in a pelagic environment.
In addition to her teaching and research at UC-Santa Barbara, Alldredge works at the Mo'orea Coral Reef as a researcher with the LTER Study in Mo'orea, French Polynesia studying the currents and forces effecting water transport of the island. In addition to evaluating the biological effect of zooplankton and fish on the reef, scientists are evaluating the biochemical characteristics and  differences between waters over the reef and offshore waters. Alldredge has been credited for her role in UC-Santa Barbara's ranking as 7th best university worldwide based on its global scientific impact and collaboration record. She is in the top 0.1% of the ISI Web of Knowledge's highly cited researchers and has remained there since 2003.
Alldredge became the chair of the Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Biology at UC-Santa Barbara in 2004.

Awards and honors
In 1990, Alldredge was elected as a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in 1992 she won the Henry Bryant Bigelow Medal from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and in 1995, she was awarded the first chair of UC-Santa Barbara's graduate program in Marine Science, which she held until 2004 and was awarded $5,000. In 1996, she was honored with a Distinguished Teaching Award for Sciences from UC-Santa Barbara, and in 1998 was selected as a Fellow of the American Geophysical Union.
In 2008, she was awarded the G. Evelyn Hutchinson Award from the American Society of Limnology and Oceanography and in 2011 received the Alumni Association Distinguished Achievement Award from Carleton College.

Selected Publications
Characteristics, dynamics and significance of marine snow. Alice L Alldredge and Mary W Silver. 1988. Progress in Oceanography.
Intense hydrolytic enzyme activity on marine aggregates and implications for rapid particle dissolution. David C Smith, Meinhard Simon, Alice L Alldredge, and Farooq Azam. 1992. Nature.
Phylogenetic diversity of aggregate-attached vs. free-living marine bacterial assemblages. Edward F DeLong, Diana G Franks and Alice L Alldredge. 1993. Limnology and Oceanography.
The abundance and significance of a class of large, transparent organic particles in the ocean. Alice L Alldredge, Uta Passow and Bruce E Logan. 1993. Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers.
The oceanic gel phase: a bridge in the DOM–POM continuum. Pedro Verdugo, Alice L Alldredge, Farooq Azam, David L Kirchman, Uta Passow, Peter H Santschi. 2004. Marine Chemistry.

Personal life
Alldredge has three children with her husband, James M. King. She has expressed gratitude for being able to balance family life along with studies and research. Alldredge and her family live in Goleta, California, and in addition to her work, she is a leader of a Buddhist meditation community in the Santa Barbara area.

References
External links
WorldCat Publications list

================================================================================

# American Geophysical Union

The American Geophysical Union (AGU) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization of Earth, atmospheric, ocean, hydrologic, space, and planetary scientists and enthusiasts that according to their website includes 130,000 people (not members). AGU's activities are focused on the organization and dissemination of scientific information in the interdisciplinary and international fields within the Earth and space sciences. The geophysical sciences involve four fundamental areas: atmospheric and ocean sciences; solid-Earth sciences; hydrologic sciences; and space sciences. The organization's headquarters is located on Florida Avenue in Washington, D.C.

History
The AGU was established in December 1919 by the National Research Council (NRC) to represent the United States in the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), and its first chairman was William Bowie of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey (USCGS). For more than 50 years, it operated as an unincorporated affiliate of the National Academy of Sciences. On June 29, 1972, AGU was incorporated in the District of Columbia and membership was opened to scientists and students worldwide.
The AGU was intended to promote "pure" geophysics; exploration geophysics has its own society, the Society of Exploration Geophysicists. In a March 1919 report by a committee chaired by Robert S. Woodward of the Carnegie Institution, geophysics was defined as a collection of "borderlands" (closely related, mutually dependent subjects): astronomy, geodesy, geology, meteorology, oceanography, seismology, terrestrial magnetism, terrestrial electricity, tides, and volcanology. The AGU was organized under seven sections: Geodesy, Seismology, Meteorology, Terrestrial magnetism and electricity, Oceanography, Volcanology, and Geophysical chemistry. Hydrology was added in 1930 and Tectonophysics in 1940. In suggesting the latter name, Norman Bowen evoked a familiar theme: to "designate this new borderline field between geophysics, physics and geology for the solution of problems of tectonics."
The first meeting of the AGU took place on April 23, 1920. In attendance were 25 members. Up to 1930, the number of members was restricted and members were elected. In 1932 the first annual dues of US$2 were imposed. The membership grew to 4,600 in 1950; 13,000 in 1980; and 26,000 in 1990. As of 2018, it had 62,000 members from 137 countries.

Publications
AGU publishes the online magazine Eos and more than twenty peer-reviewed scientific journals:

The journal Radio Science is co-sponsored by the International Union of Radio Science.
The journal Earth Interactions is published in partnership with the American Meteorological Society (AMS) and the Association of American Geographers (AAG).
In addition, International Journal of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy is no longer published and AGU distributes Chinese Journal of Geophysics and Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics. Many of the journals have high impact factors, with Paleoceanography having the highest within paleontology and Reviews of Geophysics the second highest within geochemistry and geophysics as of 2010. AGU has also been publishing books for more than 85 years.
AGU has also partnered with societies to publish:

Chinese Journal of Geophysics, with the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Earth and Planetary Physics, with the Chinese Geophysical Society
Earth Interactions, with the American Meteorological Society
Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics, with the European Geosciences Union
Interpretation, with the Society of Exploration Geophysicists
The Leading Edge, with the Society of Exploration Geophysicists
AGU co-published (along with the AMS and the AAG) its first electronic journal, Earth Interactions, in 1997. It started its own electronic journal, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, in December 1999. It made a full transition to electronic publishing in 2001. For all its journals, the electronic version became the publication of record. This was accompanied by a new identification scheme for articles that entirely did away with sequential page numbers. Instead, each article had a digital object identifier (DOI). As an example, 10.1029/2001GL014304 consists of the publisher identifier (10.1029), the year (2001), the journal code (GL), and an article number (014304). This new system was met with complaints from libraries and scientists. The article numbers provided no clue for libraries to find an article in printed versions, and even scientific databases were not set up to handle DOIs. AGU officials claimed that the problems were a temporary cost of being a frontrunner, but did retroactively assign each article a four-digit article number.
In 2012 the journals and books, including over one and a half million pages of legacy content, were transferred to the Wiley Online Library. John Wiley & Sons were recognized for this work with the IT Project Team of the Year Award at the UK IT Industry Awards for 2013.
Five AGU journals are open access only: AGU Advances, Earth’s Future, Earth and Space Science, GeoHealth, JAMES, and Space Weather. The remainder are delayed open access journals, having free access after a two-year rolling period.
The AGU hosts a number of blogs, collectively known as the AGU Blogosphere, informally publishing frequent updates on the Earth and space sciences.

Texaco copyright case
AGU publications are copyrighted, but in the United States many exceptions to the exclusive rights of copyright are allowed under the fair use provision, part of the Copyright Act of 1976. Making copies of publications are allowed for such uses as teaching and research as long as a set of four criteria are met. However, when Texaco's corporate library made systematic copies of journal articles for its collection, AGU and five other publishers took Texaco to court. The judges found for AGU. Texaco was fined and agreed to retroactively purchase a license from the Copyright Clearance Center.

Executive
Presidents
The presidents of the AGU have been:

Executive directors
While more than 40 presidents have provided scientific leadership for the AGU since 1919, operational leadership has been provided by a larger team. The first senior team member was John Adam Fleming, who was elected Secretary in 1925 and changed the name of his position to General Secretary. He served as a volunteer while working at the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism at the Carnegie Institution. By 1943, with the membership nearing 2,000, AGU recognized the need for a full-time professional administrator. The post was renamed Executive Secretary and Waldo E. Smith was hired. He served until 1970 and then Athelstan Spilhaus, Jr. was hired as executive director. Christine McEntee replaced him in 2010. Medals have been named after Fleming and Smith. The AGU leadership in 2021 included, in addition to the president, a CEO, 4 executive vice presidents, 6 vice presidents, 7 directors, and a chief digital officer.

Recognition
The AGU offers several awards, medals and fellowships.

Awards
The Africa Award for Research Excellence in Earth or Ocean Sciences (established 2015), awarded annually to an early career scientist from the continent of Africa, "for completing significant work that shows the focus and promise of making outstanding contributions to research in Earth or ocean sciences."
The Africa Award for Research Excellence in Space Science (established 2015), awarded annually to an early career scientist from the continent of Africa, "for completing significant work that shows the focus and promise of making outstanding contributions to research in space science."
The Ambassador Award (established 2013), awarded annually to up to five honorees in recognition "for outstanding contributions to one or more of the following area(s): societal impact, service to the Earth and space community, scientific leadership, and promotion of talent/career pool." This is the only AGU award whose recipients are conferred AGU Fellows.
The Athelstan Spilhaus Award (established 2006), named after Athelstan Frederick Spilhaus, Sr. who created the bathythermograph and also a long-running science cartoon, "for enhancement of the public understanding of Earth and space science."
The Charles S. Falkenberg Award (established in 2002), named after Falkenberg, who applied data visualization and information technology to earth sciences, to an individual "scientist under 45 years of age who has contributed to the quality of life, economic opportunities, and stewardship of the planet through the use of Earth science information and to the public awareness of the importance of understanding our planet."
The Pavel S. Molchanov Climate Communications Prize (established in 2011 and permanently endowed by Pavel S. Molchanov in 2023) is awarded "in recognition of the communication of climate science to promote scientific literacy, clarity of message, and efforts to foster respect and understanding of science-based values, particularly around climate change."
The David Perlman Award (established 2000), named after the science editor of the San Francisco Chronicle, "for excellence in researching and reporting a news story that meets one or more of the following criteria: brings new information or concepts about AGU sciences to the public's attention, identifies and corrects misconceptions about AGU sciences, or makes AGU sciences accessible and interesting to general audiences, without sacrificing accuracy."
The Edward A. Flinn III Award (established 1990), named after a leader of the NASA Geodynamics Program who directed efforts to detect motion of the Earth's crust using laser ranging, to an "individual who personifies the Union's motto 'unselfish cooperation in research' through their facilitating, coordinating, and implementing activities."
The Excellence in Geophysical Education Award (established in 1995) "to acknowledge a sustained commitment to excellence in geophysical education by a team, individual, or group. To educators who have had a major impact on geophysical education at any level (kindergarten through postgraduate), who have been outstanding teachers and trainers for a number of years, or who have made a long-lasting, positive impact on geophysical education through professional service."
The International Award (established 2007) "to recognize an individual scientist or a small team for making an outstanding contribution to furthering the Earth and space sciences and using science for the benefit of society in less favored nations."
The Outstanding Student Presentation Award (OSPA), "are awarded to promote, recognize and reward undergraduate, Master’s and PhD students for quality research in the geophysical sciences. Each year, Sections recruit judges to assess and score student oral and poster presentations at meetings. Typically the top 2–5% of presenters in each Section are awarded an OSPA."
The Robert C. Cowen Award (established 1991), named after a long-time editor of The Christian Science Monitor, "for a journalist or a group that has made significant, lasting, and consistent contributions to accurate reporting or writing on the geophysical sciences for the general public."
The Science for Solutions Award (established 2012) "for significant contributions in the application and use of Earth and space sciences to solve societal problems."
The Walter Sullivan Award for Excellence in Science Journalism (established 2000), named after the renowned science writer of The New York Times, awarded annually for science feature writing.
The William Kaula Award (established 2003), named after geophysicist and physical geodesist William M. Kaula, for "extraordinary dedication to, and exceptional efforts on behalf of, the Union's publications program." (Awarded on even-numbered years.)

Fellowships
AGU nominates members for fellowship in the society. According to the AGU website "To be elected a Fellow of AGU is a special tribute for those who have made exceptional scientific contributions to Earth and space sciences as valued by their peers and vetted by section and focus group committees." A maximum of 0.1% of the membership can be elected each year.

Medals
The Charles A. Whitten Medal (established 1984), named after Charles A. Whitten, a former AGU General Secretary and geodesist, "for outstanding achievement in research on the form and dynamics of the Earth and planets."
The Devendra Lal Memorial Medal (established 2016) was named after Devendra Lal. Lal had a founding role in developing the field in which cosmic rays produced isotopes on Earth and are used as tracers to investigate a wide range of Earth Science problems. The Medal is awarded "for outstanding Earth and/or space sciences research by a scientist belonging to and working in a developing country."
The James B. Macelwane Medal (established 1961), named after James B. Macelwane, a former AGU president who was deeply interested in teaching young scientists, "to be awarded annually for significant contributions by outstanding young scientists." Recipients must be no more than 10 years past their highest degree.
The Joanne Simpson Medal (established in 2017), named after Joanne Simpson, the first woman in the United States to receive a PhD in meteorology, "for significant contributions to the earth and space sciences by an outstanding mid-career scientist."
The John Adam Fleming Medal (established 1960), named after John Adam Fleming, a major contributor to magnetic standards and measurements, "for original research and technical leadership in geomagnetism, atmospheric electricity, aeronomy, space physics, and related sciences."
The Maurice Ewing Medal (established 1974 and co-sponsored by the United States Navy), named after Maurice Ewing, a major contributor to oceanography, "for significant original contributions to the scientific understanding of the processes in the ocean; for the advancement of oceanographic engineering, technology, and instrumentation; and for outstanding service to the marine sciences."
The Harry H. Hess Medal (established 1984), named after Harry Hammond Hess, who made major contributions to the study of the oceanic lithosphere, "for outstanding achievements in research of the constitution and evolution of Earth and other planets."
The Inge Lehmann Medal (established 1995), named after Inge Lehmann, the discoverer of the Earth's inner core, "for outstanding contributions to the understanding of the structure, composition, and dynamics of the Earth's mantle and core."
The Robert E. Horton Medal (established 1974), named after Robert E. Horton, who provided many of the analytical concepts for understanding the hydrologic cycle "for outstanding contributions to hydrology."
The Roger Revelle Medal (established 1991), named after Roger Revelle, an oceanographer notable for his contribution to the understanding of global change, "for outstanding contributions in atmospheric sciences, atmosphere-ocean coupling, atmosphere-land coupling, biogeochemical cycles, climate, or related aspects of the Earth system."
The Waldo E. Smith Medal (established 1982), named after Waldo E. Smith, the first Executive Secretary of AGU, to recognize "individuals who have played unique leadership roles in such diverse areas as scientific associations, education, legislation, research, public understanding of science, management, and philanthropy, and whose accomplishments have greatly strengthened and helped advance the geophysical sciences."
The Walter H. Bucher Medal (established 1966), named after Walter Hermann Bucher, a former AGU president and major contributor to crustal problems, "for original contributions to the basic knowledge of the crust and lithosphere."
The William Bowie Medal is the highest AGU honor and is awarded at most annually for "outstanding contributions to fundamental geophysics and for unselfish cooperation in research"; its namesake was the first recipient in 1939.

Sections
The AGU is divided into 25 sections that provide the main structure for managing volunteers, developing leaders and honoring scientists. These sections also reflect the breadth of science within Earth and space science: atmospheric and space electricity; atmospheric sciences; biogeosciences; cryosphere sciences; Earth and planetary surface processes; Earth and space science informatics; education; geodesy; geohealth; geomagnetism; paleomagnetism and electromagnetism; hydrology; mineral and rock physics; natural hazards; near surface geophysics; nonlinear geophysics; ocean sciences; paleoceanography; planetary sciences; seismology; societal impacts and policy sciences; space physics and aeronomy; study of the Earth's deep interior; tectonophysics; volcanology, geochemistry, and petrology.

Meetings
AGU holds an annual meeting every December (known as the Fall Meeting). Until 2017, the meeting was held yearly in San Francisco. Because of renovations at the San Francisco venue, the 2017 meeting took place in New Orleans and the 2018 meeting in Washington, DC. It returned to San Francisco in 2019 and its location will rotate among San Francisco, New Orleans, Chicago, and Washington, DC. Previously, a second meeting was held every Spring (April through May) in locations around the world. The latter grew out of AGU's annual Spring meeting, which had been held for many years in Baltimore, until declining interest caused AGU to move the meeting to different locations, starting with Boston in 1998. With the 2003 meeting in Nice, France, it became known as the Joint Assembly because AGU co-sponsors it with other societies such as the Geochemical Society, the Mineralogical Society of America (MSA), the Canadian Geophysical Union (CGU), and the European Geosciences Union (EGU). The Fall Meeting had more than 25,000 attendees in 2018.
In addition to the Fall meeting that covers all areas of the geophysical sciences, AGU sponsors many specialized meetings that are intended to serve the needs of particular scientific disciplines or geographical areas, including the Ocean Sciences Meeting, which is held in even numbered years. Small, highly focused meetings are offered through the Chapman Conferences.
The large numbers and international participation in the Fall Meeting results in a large contribution to greenhouse gases. The 9500 participants in the 2002 meeting traveled an average of 8,000 kilometres (5,000 mi) to attend, producing 1.3 metric tons of carbon dioxide, or one-sixteenth of the average yearly emissions for Americans. The AGU has made some adjustments such as asking shuttle bus drivers to turn off their engines when they are not moving, but 95% of the emissions come from jet fuel. In an unpublished study, David Scott and Lawrence Plug of Dalhousie University estimated that the AGU could reduce emissions by 7.7% if it moved the Fall Meeting to Denver, Colorado.
In 2017, the first joint JpGU-AGU meeting was held in Chiba, Japan. The meeting was a joint effort between AGU and the Japan Geoscience Union.

Science and society
On occasion the AGU Council issues position statements on matters affecting public policy that are related to geophysics. These include biological evolution, natural hazards, science education and funding, and climate change. The AGU adopted its first position statement on climate change in December 1998. That statement began

Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases have substantially increased as a consequence of fossil fuel combustion and other human activities. These elevated concentrations of greenhouse gases are predicted to persist in the atmosphere for times ranging to thousands of years. Increasing concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases affect the Earth-atmosphere energy balance, enhancing the natural greenhouse effect and thereby exerting a warming influence at the Earth's surface.
The statement continued,

Present understanding of the Earth climate system provides a compelling basis for legitimate public concern over future global and regional-scale changes resulting from increased concentrations of greenhouse gases.
After a discussion of scientific uncertainties the statement concluded

AGU believes that the present level of scientific uncertainty does not justify inaction in the mitigation of human induced climate change and/or the adaptation to it.
The adopted position statement was backed up by a detailed supporting document. The AGU position statement has undergone several revisions, most recently revised and reaffirmed in 2012.
In 2014, AGU developed the Sharing Science program to provide scientists with the skills and tools that they need to communicate science with any audience. The program offers resources, workshops, hands-on support, and opportunities to help scientists more effectively communicate with broader audiences about Earth and space science. Audiences range from journalists, educators and students, policy makers, and the broader public.
Members of the AGU who work in politically-controversial fields have come under legal attack. For example, Michael Mann, a Fellow of the AGU and lead author of the original "hockey stick graph" study, faced a legal demand to turn over his private emails from Kenneth Cuccinelli II, at the time the attorney general of the state of Virginia, a conservative Republican who argues that there is no persuasive evidence that human activity is warming the planet. The court rejected Cuccinelli's demand. However, such legal challenges continue, so in 2012 AGU entered in a partnership with the Climate Science Legal Defense Fund to offer legal counseling at the Fall Meeting.

Scientific ethics
In 2011, AGU created a Task Force on Scientific Ethics, "to review and update existing policies and procedures for dealing with scientific misconduct." This effort received a setback when its chairman, Peter Gleick, announced that he had lied to obtain internal documents from the Heartland Institute and then leaked them to the public. Gleick, a climate scientist and recipient of the MacArthur Fellowship, said he was motivated by frustration with the efforts of groups such as the Heartland Institute to attack climate science and scientists, but admitted that it was a serious lapse of judgement. He resigned from the task force on February 16, 2012, and was replaced by Linda Gundersen, director of the Office of Science Quality and Integrity at the United States Geological Survey (USGS).
In 2017, AGU adopted and updated ethics policy, called the AGU Scientific Integrity and Professional Ethics. Among other updates, the policy updated its definitions of what counts as scientific misconduct to include harassment, bullying, and discrimination. The change came, in part, as a result of a 2016 workshop AGU convened to address the challenge of sexual and gender-based harassment, with co-sponsorship by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the American Chemical Society (ACS), the American Geosciences Institute (AGI), the Association for Women Geoscientists (AWG), and the Earth Science Women's Network (ESWN). Additionally, AGU staff are trained in how to address incidents of harassment at their annual meeting and wear "Safe AGU" buttons to signify themselves as resources.
On February 27, 2018, AGU CEO Chris McEntee testified before the House Committee on Science, Space, & Technology Subcommittee on Research and Technology Hearing – A Review of Sexual Harassment and Misconduct in Science. His testimony was alongside those of Rhonda Davis, head of the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Office of Diversity and Inclusion, Kathryn Clancy, an anthropologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and attorney Kristina Larsen.
In July 2019, the AGU was awarded a three-year grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation to launch the AGU Ethics and Equity Initiative, a collaboration among the AGU and the National Center for Professional and Research Ethics at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. The initiative will tackle issues around sexual harassment and gender-based discrimination by developing new educational resources and tracking tools to measure impact.
In December 2022, AGU punished climate scientists Rose Abramoff and Peter Kalmus for misconduct, who interrupted a plenary session of the annual Fall Meeting with a call for scientists to engage in protest against climate change. AGU removed their research presentations from the meeting, banned them from participation, launched a misconduct inquiry, and complained to Abramoff's employer, Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Kalmus and Abramoff further claimed that AGU threatened to have them arrested if they returned to the meeting. Abramoff was fired by Oak Ridge in January 2023.

Corporate sponsorship
In 2014, the AGU accepted 5469 gifts, grants and pledges from individuals and corporations. Of these, the 1919 Society (gifts of over $100,000) included ExxonMobil, Integrated Ocean Drilling Program Management International, and Nature's Own. AGU also was found to have many annual events sponsored by corporations, including an annual Student Breakfast (supported by ExxonMobil) and Amazon Web Services supported research grants and that offer access to its cloud computing resources. In 2015, the AGU Board approved a new Organizational Support Policy. The policy covers subjects such as advertorials and member surveys. It requires that partnerships contribute to AGU's mission, vision and goals and that the AGU "apply vetting to ascertain that partners are not engaged in false misinterpretations of science."
The sponsorship of AGU by ExxonMobil became a source of concern for many members after evidence surfaced that ExxonMobil had known about climate change for decades but had actively worked to undermine climate science. On February 22, 2016, a letter signed by 100 scientists was delivered to the AGU, requesting that they cut all ties with ExxonMobil and other companies that foster climate misinformation. The AGU Board of Directors met on April 22, 2016, and voted to continue accepting sponsorship from ExxonMobil, arguing that there was not unequivocal evidence that ExxonMobil continues to participate in climate misinformation. Instead of making a short-term political statement, the Board wished to engage with the energy industry over the long term. In response, Senator Sheldon Whitehouse and Representative Ted Lieu sent a critical letter saying that ExxonMobil continues to fund climate denial and is misleading the AGU. The Union of Concerned Scientists also sent a letter urging them to reconsider. However, in a meeting on September 23, 2016, the Board upheld its previous decision.

Fossil fuel divestment
In November 2021, AGU announced in a video presentation that, as a consequence of its Environmental, social, and corporate governance policies, it no longer had any direct investments in fossil-fuel companies and it was beginning to divest its investment portfolio from mutual fund holdings in fossil-fuel companies.

See also
Geological Society of America
List of geoscience organizations
List of geophysicists
Scientific consensus on climate change

References
Further reading
External links
Archival collections
American Geophysical Union miscellaneous publications, 1982–2012, Niels Bohr Library & Archives
American Geophysical Union records, 1919–2012, Niels Bohr Library & Archives
American Geophysical Union History of Geophysics Committee records, 1981–2004, Niels Bohr Library & Archives

================================================================================

# Global Ocean Observing System

The Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) is a global system for sustained observations of the ocean comprising the oceanographic component of the Global Earth Observing System of Systems (GEOSS).  GOOS is administrated by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), and joins the Global Climate Observing System, GCOS, and Global Terrestrial Observing System, GTOS, as fundamental building blocks of the GEOSS.
GOOS is a platform for:

International cooperation for sustained observation of the oceans.
Generations of oceanographic products and services.
Interaction between research, operational, and user communities.
GOOS serves oceanographic researchers, coastal managers, parties to international conventions, national meteorological and oceanographic agencies, hydrographic offices, marine and coastal industries, policymakers, and the interested general public.
GOOS is sponsored by the IOC, UNEP, WMO, and ICSU. It is implemented by member states via their government agencies, navies and oceanographic research institutions working together in a wide range of thematic panels and regional alliances.
The GOOS Scientific Steering Committee provides guidance, while Scientific and Technical Panels evaluate Essential Ocean Variable observation systems. The secretariat director, from 2004 to 2011 was Keith Alverson. The secretariat director from 2011–2022 it was Albert Fischer.

Essential ocean variables
Essential Ocean Variables (EOVs) are a collection of ocean properties selected in a way so as to provide the best, most cost-effective suite of data that enables quantification of key ocean processes. They are selected based on their Relevance, Feasibility, and Cost effectiveness. They fall into four categories - physics, biogeochemistry, biology and ecosystems, and cross-disciplinary. Their consistent usage is promoted by agencies such as GOOS and Southern. The EOVs are:

Physics
Sea state
Ocean surface stress
Sea ice
Sea surface height
Sea surface temperature
Subsurface temperature
Surface currents
Subsurface currents
Sea surface salinity
Subsurface salinity
Ocean surface heat flux
Biogeochemistry
Oxygen
Nutrients
Inorganic carbon
Transient tracers
Particulate matter
Nitrous oxide
Stable carbon isotopes
Dissolved organic carbon
Biology and Ecosystems
Phytoplankton biomass and diversity
Zooplankton biomass and diversity
Fish abundance and distribution
Marine turtles, birds, mammals abundance and distribution
Hard coral cover and composition
Seagrass cover and composition
Macroalgal canopy cover and composition
Mangrove cover and composition
Microbe biomass and diversity  (*emerging)
Invertebrate abundance and distribution (*emerging)
Cross-disciplinary
Ocean color
Ocean Sound

See also
Integrated Ocean Observing System
Terrestrial Ecosystem Monitoring Sites (GTOS)

References
External links
GOOS Web Archived 2013-09-11 at the Wayback Machine

================================================================================

# Dissolved organic carbon

Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is the fraction of organic carbon operationally defined as that which can pass through a filter with a pore size typically between 0.22 and 0.7 micrometers. The fraction remaining on the filter is called particulate organic carbon (POC).
Dissolved organic matter (DOM) is a closely related term often used interchangeably with DOC. While DOC refers specifically to the mass of carbon in the dissolved organic material, DOM refers to the total mass of the dissolved organic matter. So DOM also includes the mass of other elements present in the organic material, such as nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen. DOC is a component of DOM and there is typically about twice as much DOM as DOC. Many statements that can be made about DOC apply equally to DOM, and vice versa.
DOC is abundant in marine and freshwater systems and is one of the greatest cycled reservoirs of organic matter on Earth, accounting for the same amount of carbon as in the atmosphere and up to 20% of all organic carbon. In general, organic carbon compounds are the result of decomposition processes from dead organic matter including plants and animals. DOC can originate from within or outside any given body of water. DOC originating from within the body of water is known as autochthonous DOC and typically comes from aquatic plants or algae, while DOC originating outside the body of water is known as allochthonous DOC and typically comes from soils or terrestrial plants. When water originates from land areas with a high proportion of organic soils, these components can drain into rivers and lakes as DOC.
The marine DOC pool is important for the functioning of marine ecosystems because they are at the interface between the chemical and the biological worlds. DOC fuels marine food webs, and is a major component of the Earth's carbon cycling.

Overview
DOC is a basic nutrient, supporting growth of microorganisms and plays an important role in the global carbon cycle through the microbial loop. In some organisms (stages) that do not feed in the traditional sense, dissolved matter may be the only external food source. Moreover, DOC is an indicator of organic loadings in streams, as well as supporting terrestrial processing (e.g., within soil, forests, and wetlands) of organic matter. Dissolved organic carbon has a high proportion of biodegradable dissolved organic carbon (BDOC) in first order streams compared to higher order streams. In the absence of extensive wetlands, bogs, or swamps, baseflow concentrations of DOC in undisturbed watersheds generally range from approximately 1 to 20 mg/L carbon.  Carbon concentrations considerably vary across ecosystems. For example, the Everglades may be near the top of the range and the middle of oceans may be near the bottom. Occasionally, high concentrations of organic carbon indicate anthropogenic influences, but most DOC originates naturally.
The BDOC fraction consists of organic molecules that heterotrophic bacteria can use as a source of energy and carbon. Some subset of DOC constitutes the precursors of disinfection byproducts for drinking water. BDOC can contribute to undesirable biological regrowth within water distribution systems.
The dissolved fraction of total organic carbon (TOC) is an operational classification. Many researchers use the term "dissolved" for compounds that pass through a 0.45 μm filter, but 0.22 μm filters have also been used to remove higher colloidal concentrations.
A practical definition of dissolved typically used in marine chemistry is all substances that pass through a GF/F filter, which has a nominal pore size of approximately 0.7 μm (Whatman glass microfiber filter, 0.6–0.8 μm particle retention). The recommended procedure is the HTCO technique, which calls for filtration through pre-combusted glass fiber filters, typically the GF/F classification.

Labile and recalcitrant
Dissolved organic matter can be classified as labile or as recalcitrant, depending on its reactivity. Recalcitrant DOC is also called refractory DOC, and these terms seem to be used interchangeably in the context of DOC. Depending on the origin and composition of DOC, its behavior and cycling are different; the labile fraction of DOC decomposes rapidly through microbially or photochemically mediated processes, whereas refractory DOC is resistant to degradation and can persist in the ocean for millennia. In the coastal ocean, organic matter from terrestrial plant litter or soils appears to be more refractory and thus often behaves conservatively. In addition, refractory DOC is produced in the ocean by the bacterial transformation of labile DOC, which reshapes its composition.
Due to the continuous production and degradation in natural systems, the DOC pool contains a spectrum of reactive compounds each with their own reactivity, that have been divided into fractions from labile to recalcitrant, depending on the turnover times, as shown in the following table...

This wide range in turnover or degradation times has been linked with the chemical composition, structure and molecular size, but degradation also depends on the environmental conditions (e.g., nutrients), prokaryote diversity, redox state, iron availability, mineral-particle associations, temperature, sun-light exposure, biological production of recalcitrant compounds, and the effect of priming or dilution of individual molecules. For example, lignin can be degraded in aerobic soils but is relatively recalcitrant in anoxic marine sediments. This example shows bioavailability varies as a function of the ecosystem's properties. Accordingly, even normally ancient and recalcitrant compounds, such as petroleum, carboxyl-rich alicyclic molecules, can be degraded in the appropriate environmental setting.

Terrestrial ecosystems
Soil
Dissolved organic matter (DOM) is one of the most active and mobile carbon pools and has an important role in global carbon cycling. In addition, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) affects the soil negative electrical charges denitrification process, acid-base reactions in the soil solution, retention and translocation of nutrients (cations), and immobilization of heavy metals and xenobiotics. Soil DOM can be derived from different sources (inputs), such as atmospheric carbon dissolved in rainfall, litter and crop residues, manure, root exudates, and decomposition of soil organic matter (SOM). In the soil, DOM availability depends on its interactions with mineral components (e.g., clays, Fe and Al oxides) modulated by adsorption and desorption processes. It also depends on SOM fractions (e.g., stabilized organic molecules and microbial biomass) by mineralization and immobilization processes. In addition, the intensity of these interactions changes according to soil inherent properties, land use, and crop management.
During the decomposition of organic material, most carbon is lost as CO2 to the atmosphere by microbial oxidation. Soil type and landscape slope, leaching, and runoff are also important processes associated to DOM losses in the soil. In well-drained soils, leached DOC can reach the water table and release nutrients and pollutants that can contaminate groundwater, whereas runoff transports DOM and xenobiotics to other areas, rivers, and lakes.

Groundwater
Precipitation and surface water leaches dissolved organic carbon (DOC) from vegetation and plant litter and percolates through the soil column to the saturated zone. The concentration, composition, and bioavailability of DOC are altered during transport through the soil column by various physicochemical and biological processes, including sorption, desorption, biodegradation and biosynthesis. Hydrophobic molecules are preferentially partitioned onto soil minerals and have a longer retention time in soils than hydrophilic molecules. The hydrophobicity and retention time of colloids and dissolved molecules in soils are controlled by their size, polarity, charge, and bioavailability. Bioavailable DOM is subjected to microbial decomposition, resulting in a reduction in size and molecular weight. Novel molecules are synthesized by soil microbes, and some of these metabolites enter the DOC reservoir in groundwater.

Freshwater ecosystems
Aquatic carbon occurs in different forms. Firstly, a division is made between organic and inorganic carbon. Organic carbon is a mixture of organic compounds originating from detritus or primary producers. It can be divided into POC (particulate organic carbon; particles > 0.45 μm) and DOC (dissolved organic carbon; particles < 0.45 μm). DOC usually makes up 90% of the total amount of aquatic organic carbon. Its concentration ranges from 0.1 to >300 mg L−1.
Likewise, inorganic carbon also consists of a particulate (PIC) and a dissolved phase (DIC). PIC mainly consists of carbonates (e.g., CaCO3), DIC consists of carbonate (CO32-), bicarbonate (HCO3−), CO2 and a negligibly small fraction of carbonic acid (H2CO3). The inorganic carbon compounds exist in equilibrium that depends on the pH of the water. DIC concentrations in freshwater range from about zero in acidic waters to 60 mg C L−1 in areas with carbonate-rich sediments.
POC can be degraded to form DOC; DOC can become POC by flocculation. Inorganic and organic carbon are linked through aquatic organisms. CO2 is used in photosynthesis (P) by for instance macrophytes, produced by respiration (R), and exchanged with the atmosphere. Organic carbon is produced by organisms and is released during and after their life; e.g., in rivers, 1–20% of the total amount of DOC is produced by macrophytes. Carbon can enter the system from the catchment and is transported to the oceans by rivers and streams. There is also exchange with carbon in the sediments, e.g., burial of organic carbon, which is important for carbon sequestration in aquatic habitats.
Aquatic systems are very important in global carbon sequestration; e.g., when different European ecosystems are compared, inland aquatic systems form the second largest carbon sink (19–41 Tg C y−1); only forests take up more carbon (125–223 Tg C y−1).

Marine ecosystems
Sources
In marine systems DOC originates from either autochthonous or allochthonous sources. Autochthonous DOC is produced within the system, primarily by plankton organisms  and in coastal waters additionally by benthic microalgae, benthic fluxes, and macrophytes, whereas allochthonous DOC is mainly of terrestrial origin supplemented by groundwater and atmospheric inputs. In addition to soil derived humic substances, terrestrial DOC also includes material leached from plants exported during rain events, emissions of plant materials to the atmosphere and deposition in aquatic environments (e.g., volatile organic carbon and pollens), and also thousands of synthetic human-made organic chemicals that can be measured in the ocean at trace concentrations.
Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) represents one of the Earth's major carbon pools. It contains a similar amount of carbon as the atmosphere and exceeds the amount of carbon bound in marine biomass by more than two-hundred times. DOC is mainly produced in the near-surface layers during primary production and zooplankton grazing processes. Other sources of marine DOC are dissolution from particles, terrestrial and hydrothermal vent input, and microbial production. Prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) contribute to the DOC pool via release of capsular material, exopolymers, and hydrolytic enzymes, as well as via mortality (e.g. viral shunt). Prokaryotes are also the main decomposers of DOC, although for some of the most recalcitrant forms of DOC very slow abiotic degradation in hydrothermal systems  or possibly sorption to sinking particles  may be the main removal mechanism. Mechanistic knowledge about DOC-microbe-interactions is crucial to understand the cycling and distribution of this active carbon reservoir.

Phytoplankton
Phytoplankton produces DOC by extracellular release commonly accounting between 5 and 30% of their total primary production, although this varies from species to species. Nonetheless, this release of extracellular DOC is enhanced under high light and low nutrient levels, and thus should increase relatively from eutrophic to oligotrophic areas, probably as a mechanism for dissipating cellular energy. Phytoplankton can also produce DOC by autolysis during physiological stress situations e.g., nutrient limitation. Other studies have demonstrated DOC production in association with meso- and macro-zooplankton feeding on phytoplankton and bacteria.

Zooplankton
Zooplankton-mediated release of DOC occurs through sloppy feeding, excretion and defecation which can be important energy sources for microbes. Such DOC production is largest during periods with high food concentration and dominance of large zooplankton species.

Bacteria and viruses
Bacteria are often viewed as the main consumers of DOC, but they can also produce DOC during cell division and viral lysis. The biochemical components of bacteria are largely the same as other organisms, but some compounds from the cell wall are unique and are used to trace bacterial derived DOC (e.g., peptidoglycan). These compounds are widely distributed in the ocean, suggesting that bacterial DOC production could be important in marine systems. Viruses are the most abundant life forms in the oceans infecting all life forms including algae, bacteria and zooplankton. After infection, the virus either enters a dormant (lysogenic) or productive (lytic) state. The lytic cycle causes disruption of the cell(s) and release of DOC.

Macrophytes
Marine macrophytes (i.e., macroalgae and seagrass) are highly productive and extend over large areas in coastal waters but their production of DOC has not received much attention. Macrophytes release DOC during growth with a conservative estimate (excluding release from decaying tissues) suggesting that macroalgae release between 1–39% of their gross primary production, while seagrasses release less than 5% as DOC of their gross primary production. The released DOC has been shown to be rich in carbohydrates, with rates depending on temperature and light availability. Globally the macrophyte communities have been suggested to produce ~160 Tg C yr−1 of DOC, which is approximately half the annual global river DOC input (250 Tg C yr−1).

Marine sediments
Marine sediments represent the main sites of OM degradation and burial in the ocean, hosting microbes in densities up to 1000 times higher than found in the water column. The DOC concentrations in sediments are often an order of magnitude higher than in the overlying water column. This concentration difference results in a continued diffusive flux and suggests that sediments are a major DOC source releasing 350 Tg C yr−1, which is comparable to the input of DOC from rivers. This estimate is based on calculated diffusive fluxes and does not include resuspension events which also releases DOC  and therefore the estimate could be conservative. Also, some studies have shown that geothermal systems and petroleum seepage contribute with pre-aged DOC to the deep ocean basins, but consistent global estimates of the overall input are currently lacking. Globally, groundwaters account for an unknown part of the freshwater DOC flux to the oceans. The DOC in groundwater is a mixture of terrestrial, infiltrated marine, and in situ microbially produced material. This flux of DOC to coastal waters could be important, as concentrations in groundwater are generally higher than in coastal seawater, but reliable global estimates are also currently lacking.

Sinks
The main processes that remove DOC from the ocean water column are: (1) Thermal degradation in e.g., submarine hydrothermal systems; (2) bubble coagulation and abiotic flocculation into microparticles  or sorption to particles; (3) abiotic degradation via photochemical reactions; and (4) biotic degradation by heterotrophic marine prokaryotes. It has been suggested that the combined effects of photochemical and microbial degradation represent the major sinks of DOC.

Thermal degradation
Thermal degradation of DOC has been found at high-temperature hydrothermal ridge-flanks, where outflow DOC concentrations are lower than in the inflow. While the global impact of these processes has not been investigated, current data suggest it is a minor DOC sink. Abiotic DOC flocculation is often observed during rapid (minutes) shifts in salinity when fresh and marine waters mix. Flocculation changes the DOC chemical composition, by removing humic compounds and reducing molecular size, transforming DOC to particulate organic flocs which can sediment and/or be consumed by grazers and filter feeders, but it also stimulates the bacterial degradation of the flocculated DOC. The impacts of flocculation on the removal of DOC from coastal waters are highly variable with some studies suggesting it can remove up to 30% of the DOC pool, while others find much lower values (3–6%;). Such differences could be explained by seasonal and system differences in the DOC chemical composition, pH, metallic cation concentration, microbial reactivity, and ionic strength.

CDOM
The colored fraction of DOC (CDOM) absorbs light in the blue and UV-light range and therefore influences plankton productivity both negatively by absorbing light, that otherwise would be available for photosynthesis, and positively by protecting plankton organisms from harmful UV-light. However, as the impact of UV damage and ability to repair is extremely variable, there is no consensus on how UV-light changes might impact overall plankton communities. The CDOM absorption of light initiates a complex range of photochemical processes, which can impact nutrient, trace metal and DOC chemical composition, and promote DOC degradation.

Photodegradation
Photodegradation involves the transformation of CDOM into smaller and less colored molecules (e.g., organic acids), or into inorganic carbon (CO, CO2), and nutrient salts (NH4−, HPO2−4). Therefore, it generally means that photodegradation transforms recalcitrant into labile DOC molecules that can be rapidly used by prokaryotes for biomass production and respiration. However, it can also increase CDOM through the transformation of compounds such as triglycerides, into more complex aromatic compounds, which are less degradable by microbes. Moreover, UV radiation can produce e.g., reactive oxygen species, which are harmful to microbes. The impact of photochemical processes on the DOC pool depends also on the chemical composition, with some studies suggesting that recently produced autochthonous DOC becomes less bioavailable while allochthonous DOC becomes more bioavailable to prokaryotes after sunlight exposure, albeit others have found the contrary. Photochemical reactions are particularly important in coastal waters which receive high loads of terrestrial derived CDOM, with an estimated ~20–30% of terrestrial DOC being rapidly photodegraded and consumed. Global estimates also suggests that in marine systems photodegradation of DOC produces ~180 Tg C yr−1 of inorganic carbon, with an additional 100 Tg C yr−1 of DOC made more available to microbial degradation. Another attempt at global ocean estimates also suggest that photodegradation (210 Tg C yr−1) is approximately the same as the annual global input of riverine DOC (250 Tg C yr−1;), while others suggest that direct photodegradation exceeds the riverine DOC inputs.

Recalcitrant and labile
DOC is conceptually divided into labile DOC, which is rapidly taken up by heterotrophic microbes, and the recalcitrant (or refractory) DOC reservoir, which has accumulated in the ocean (following a definition by Hansell). As a consequence of its recalcitrance, the accumulated DOC reaches average radiocarbon ages between 1,000 and 4,000 years in surface waters, and between 3,000 and 6,000 years in the deep ocean, indicating that it persists through several deep ocean mixing cycles between 300 and 1,400 years each. Behind these average radiocarbon ages, a large spectrum of ages is hidden. Follett et al. showed DOC comprises a fraction of modern radiocarbon age, as well as DOC reaching radiocarbon ages of up to 12,000 years.

Distribution
More precise measurement techniques developed in the late 1990s have allowed for a good understanding of how dissolved organic carbon is distributed in marine environments both vertically and across the surface. It is now understood that dissolved organic carbon in the ocean spans a range from very labile to very recalcitrant (refractory). The labile dissolved organic carbon is mainly produced by marine organisms and is consumed in the surface ocean, and consists of sugars, proteins, and other compounds that are easily used by marine bacteria. Recalcitrant dissolved organic carbon is evenly spread throughout the water column and consists of high molecular weight and structurally complex compounds that are difficult for marine organisms to use such as the lignin, pollen, or humic acids. As a result, the observed vertical distribution consists of high concentrations of labile DOC in the upper water column and low concentrations at depth.

In addition to vertical distributions, horizontal distributions have been modeled and sampled as well. In the surface ocean at a depth of 30 meters, the higher dissolved organic carbon concentrations are found in the South Pacific Gyre, the South Atlantic Gyre, and the Indian Ocean. At a depth of 3,000 meters, highest concentrations are in the North Atlantic Deep Water where dissolved organic carbon from the high concentration surface ocean is removed to depth. While in the northern Indian Ocean high DOC is observed due to high fresh water flux and sediments. Since the time scales of horizontal motion along the ocean bottom are in the thousands of years, the refractory dissolved organic carbon is slowly consumed on its way from the North Atlantic and reaches a minimum in the North Pacific.

As emergent
Dissolved organic matter is a heterogeneous pool of thousands, likely millions, of organic compounds. These compounds differ not only in composition and concentration (from pM to μM), but also originate from various organisms (phytoplankton, zooplankton, and bacteria) and environments (terrestrial vegetation and soils, coastal fringe ecosystems) and may have been produced recently or thousands of years ago. Moreover, even organic compounds deriving from the same source and of the same age may have been subjected to different processing histories prior to accumulating within the same pool of DOM.
Interior ocean DOM is a highly modified fraction that remains after years of exposure to sunlight, utilization by heterotrophs, flocculation and coagulation, and interaction with particles. Many of these processes within the DOM pool are compound- or class-specific. For example, condensed aromatic compounds are highly photosensitive, whereas proteins, carbohydrates, and their monomers are readily taken up by bacteria. Microbes and other consumers are selective in the type of DOM they utilize and typically prefer certain organic compounds over others. Consequently, DOM becomes less reactive as it is continually reworked. Said another way, the DOM pool becomes less labile and more refractory with degradation. As it is reworked, organic compounds are continually being added to the bulk DOM pool by physical mixing, exchange with particles, and/or production of organic molecules by the consumer community. As such, the compositional changes that occur during degradation are more complex than the simple removal of more labile components and resultant accumulation of remaining, less labile compounds.
Dissolved organic matter recalcitrance (i.e., its overall reactivity toward degradation and/or utilization) is therefore an emergent property. The perception of DOM recalcitrance changes during organic matter degradation and in conjunction with any other process that removes or adds organic compounds to the DOM pool under consideration.
The surprising resistance of high concentrations of DOC to microbial degradation has been addressed by several hypotheses. The prevalent notion is that the recalcitrant fraction of DOC has certain chemical properties, which prevent decomposition by microbes ("intrinsic stability hypothesis"). An alternative or additional explanation is given by the "dilution hypothesis", that all compounds are labile, but exist in concentrations individually too low to sustain microbial populations but collectively form a large pool. The dilution hypothesis has found support in recent experimental and theoretical studies.

DOM isolation and analysis
DOM is found in low concentrations in nature for direct analysis with NMR or MS. Moreover, DOM samples often contain high concentrations of inorganic salts that are incompatible with such techniques. Therefore, it is necessary a concentration and isolation step of the sample. The most used isolation techniques are ultrafiltration, reverse osmosis, and solid-phase extraction. Among them solid-phase extraction is considered as the cheapest and easiest technique.

See also
Blackwater river
Dissolved inorganic carbon
Foam line
Microbial loop
Microbial carbon pump
Total organic carbon

References
External links

Hansell DA and Carlson CA (Eds.) (2014) Biogeochemistry of Marine Dissolved Organic Matter, Second edition, Academic Press. ISBN 9780124071537.
Stone, Richard (18 June 2010). "Marine Biogeochemistry: The Invisible Hand Behind A Vast Carbon Reservoir". Science. 328 (5985): 1476–1477. Bibcode:2010Sci...328.1476S. doi:10.1126/science.328.5985.1476. PMID 20558685.

================================================================================

# Doi (identifier)

A digital object identifier (DOI) is a persistent identifier or handle used to uniquely identify various objects, standardized by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). DOIs are an implementation of the Handle System; they also fit within the URI system (Uniform Resource Identifier). They are widely used to identify academic, professional, and government information, such as journal articles, research reports, data sets, and official publications.
A DOI aims to resolve to its target, the information object to which the DOI refers. This is achieved by binding the DOI to metadata about the object, such as a URL where the object is located. Thus, by being actionable and interoperable, a DOI differs from ISBNs or ISRCs which are identifiers only. The DOI system uses the indecs Content Model to represent metadata.
The DOI for a document remains fixed over the lifetime of the document, whereas its location and other metadata may change. Referring to an online document by its DOI should provide a more stable link than directly using its URL. But if its URL changes, the publisher must update the metadata for the DOI to maintain the link to the URL. It is the publisher's responsibility to update the DOI database. If they fail to do so, the DOI resolves to a dead link, leaving the DOI useless.
The developer and administrator of the DOI system is the International DOI Foundation (IDF), which introduced it in 2000. Organizations that meet the contractual obligations of the DOI system and are willing to pay to become a member of the system can assign DOIs. The DOI system is implemented through a federation of registration agencies coordinated by the IDF. The cumulative number of DOIs has increased exponentially over time, from 50 million registrations in 2011 to 391 million in 2025. The rate of registering organizations ("members") has also increased over time from 4,000 in 2011 to 9,500 in 2013, but the federated nature of the system means it is not immediately clear how many members there are in total today. Fake registries have even appeared.

Nomenclature and syntax
A DOI is a type of Handle System handle, which takes the form of a character string divided into two parts, a prefix and a suffix, separated by a slash.

prefix/suffix

The prefix identifies the registrant of the identifier and the suffix is chosen by the registrant and identifies the specific object associated with that DOI. Most legal Unicode characters are allowed in these strings, which are interpreted in a case-insensitive manner. The prefix usually takes the form 10.NNNN, where NNNN is a number greater than or equal to 1000, whose limit depends only on the total number of registrants. The prefix may be further subdivided with periods, like 10.NNNN.N.
For example, in the DOI name 10.1000/182, the prefix is 10.1000 and the suffix is 182. The "10" part of the prefix distinguishes the handle as part of the DOI namespace, as opposed to some other Handle System namespace, and the characters 1000 in the prefix identify the registrant; in this case the registrant is the International DOI Foundation itself. 182 is the suffix, or item ID, identifying a single object (in this case, the latest version of the DOI Handbook).
DOI names can identify creative works (such as texts, images, audio or video items, and software) in both electronic and physical forms, performances, and abstract works such as licenses, parties to a transaction, etc.
The names can refer to objects at varying levels of detail: thus DOI names can identify a journal, an individual issue of a journal, an individual article in the journal, or a single table in that article. The choice of level of detail is left to the assigner, but in the DOI system it must be declared as part of the metadata that is associated with a DOI name, using a data dictionary based on the indecs Content Model.

Display
The official DOI Handbook explicitly states that DOIs should be displayed on screens and in print in the format doi:10.1000/182.
Contrary to the DOI Handbook, Crossref, a major DOI registration agency, recommends displaying a URL (for example,  instead of the officially specified format. This URL is persistent (there is a contract that ensures persistence in the doi.org domain,) so it is a PURL—providing the location of a name resolver which will redirect HTTP requests to the correct online location of the linked item.
The Crossref recommendation is primarily based on the assumption that the DOI is being displayed without being hyperlinked to its appropriate URL—the argument being that without the hyperlink it is not as easy to copy-and-paste the full URL to actually bring up the page for the DOI, thus the entire URL should be displayed, allowing people viewing the page containing the DOI to copy-and-paste the URL, by hand, into a new window/tab in their browser in order to go to the appropriate page for the document the DOI represents.

Content
Major content of the DOI system currently includes:

Scholarly materials (journal articles, books, ebooks, etc.) through Crossref, a consortium of around 3,000 publishers; Airiti, a leading provider of Chinese and Taiwanese electronic academic journals; and the Japan Link Center (JaLC) an organization providing link management and DOI assignment for electronic academic journals in Japanese.
Research datasets through DataCite, a consortium of leading research libraries, technical information providers, and scientific data centers;
European Union official publications through the EU publications office;
The Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure project at Tsinghua University and the Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of China (ISTIC), two initiatives sponsored by the Chinese government.
Permanent global identifiers for both commercial and non-commercial audio/visual content titles, edits, and manifestations through the Entertainment ID Registry, commonly known as EIDR.
In the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's publication service OECD iLibrary, each table or graph in an OECD publication is shown with a DOI name that leads to an Excel file of data underlying the tables and graphs. Further development of such services is planned.
Other registries include Crossref and the multilingual European DOI Registration Agency (mEDRA). Since 2015, RFCs can be referenced as doi:10.17487/rfc....

Features and benefits
The IDF designed the DOI system to provide a form of persistent identification, in which each DOI name permanently and unambiguously identifies the object to which it is associated (although when the publisher of a journal changes, sometimes all the DOIs will be changed, with the old DOIs no longer working). It also associates metadata with objects, allowing it to provide users with relevant pieces of information about the objects and their relationships. Included as part of this metadata are network actions that allow DOI names to be resolved to web locations where the objects they describe can be found. To achieve its goals, the DOI system combines the Handle System and the indecs Content Model with a social infrastructure.
The Handle System ensures that the DOI name for an object is not based on any changeable attributes of the object such as its physical location or ownership, that the attributes of the object are encoded in its metadata rather than in its DOI name, and that no two objects are assigned the same DOI name. Because DOI names are short character strings, they are human-readable, may be copied and pasted as text, and fit into the URI specification. The DOI name-resolution mechanism acts behind the scenes, so that users communicate with it in the same way as with any other web service; it is built on open architectures, incorporates trust mechanisms, and is engineered to operate reliably and flexibly so that it can be adapted to changing demands and new applications of the DOI system. DOI name-resolution may be used with OpenURL to select the most appropriate among multiple locations for a given object, according to the location of the user making the request. However, despite this ability, the DOI system has drawn criticism from librarians for directing users to non-free copies of documents, that would have been available for no additional fee from alternative locations.
The indecs Content Model as used within the DOI system associates metadata with objects. A small kernel of common metadata is shared by all DOI names and can be optionally extended with other relevant data, which may be public or restricted. Registrants may update the metadata for their DOI names at any time, such as when publication information changes or when an object moves to a different URL.
The International DOI Foundation (IDF) oversees the integration of these technologies and operation of the system through a technical and social infrastructure. The social infrastructure of a federation of independent registration agencies offering DOI services was modelled on existing successful federated deployments of identifiers such as GS1 and ISBN.

Comparison with other identifier schemes
A DOI name differs from commonly used Internet pointers to material, such as the Uniform Resource Locator (URL), in that it identifies an object itself as a first-class entity, rather than the specific place where the object is located at a certain time. It implements the Uniform Resource Identifier (Uniform Resource Name) concept and adds to it a data model and social infrastructure.
A DOI name also differs from standard identifier registries such as the ISBN, ISRC, etc. The purpose of an identifier registry is to manage a given collection of identifiers, whereas the primary purpose of the DOI system is to make a collection of identifiers actionable and interoperable, where that collection can include identifiers from many other controlled collections.
The DOI system offers persistent, semantically interoperable resolution to related current data and is best suited to material that will be used in services outside the direct control of the issuing assigner (e.g., public citation or managing content of value). It uses a managed registry (providing both social and technical infrastructure). It does not assume any specific business model for the provision of identifiers or services and enables other existing services to link to it in defined ways. Several approaches for making identifiers persistent have been proposed.
The comparison of persistent identifier approaches is difficult because they are not all doing the same thing. Imprecisely referring to a set of schemes as "identifiers" does not mean that they can be compared easily. Other "identifier systems" may be enabling technologies with low barriers to entry, providing an easy to use labeling mechanism that allows anyone to set up a new instance (examples include Persistent Uniform Resource Locator (PURL), URLs, Globally Unique Identifiers (GUIDs), etc.), but may lack some of the functionality of a registry-controlled scheme and will usually lack accompanying metadata in a controlled scheme.
The DOI system does not have this approach and should not be compared directly to such identifier schemes. Various applications using such enabling technologies with added features have been devised that meet some of the features offered by the DOI system for specific sectors (e.g., ARK).
A DOI name does not depend on the object's location and, in this way, is similar to a Uniform Resource Name (URN) or PURL but differs from an ordinary URL. URLs are often used as substitute identifiers for documents on the Internet although the same document at two different locations has two URLs. By contrast, persistent identifiers such as DOI names identify objects as first class entities: two instances of the same object would have the same DOI name.

Resolution
To resolve a DOI name, it may be input to a DOI resolver, such as one at the official website 
DOI name resolution is provided through the Handle System, which is an infrastructure developed and operated by CNRI (Corporation for National Research Initiatives), and is freely available to any user encountering a DOI name. Resolution redirects the user from a DOI name to one or more pieces of typed data: URLs representing instances of the object, services such as e-mail, or one or more items of metadata. To the Handle System, a DOI name is a handle, and so has a set of values assigned to it and may be thought of as a record that consists of a group of fields. Each handle value must have a data type specified in its <type> field, which defines the syntax and semantics of its data. While a DOI persistently and uniquely identifies the object to which it is assigned, DOI resolution may not be persistent, due to technical and administrative issues.
Another approach, which avoids typing or copying and pasting into a resolver is to include the DOI in a document as a URL which uses the resolver as an HTTP proxy, such as  (preferred) or  both of which support HTTPS. For example, the DOI 10.1000/182 can be included in a reference or hyperlink as  This approach allows users to click on the DOI as a normal hyperlink. Indeed, as previously mentioned, this is how Crossref recommends that DOIs always be represented (preferring HTTPS over HTTP), so that if they are cut-and-pasted into other documents, emails, etc., they will be actionable.
An interesting consequence of the fact that DOIs depend entirely on CNRI’s Handle System infrastructure (whereby CNRI operates the global root servers and wrote the protocol) is that the proxy services DOI.org/<#> and hdl.handle.net/<#> are interoperable. For example, the following URIs resolve to the same publication:

There are other DOI resolvers and HTTP Proxies apart from NCRI's Handle System. At the beginning of the year 2016, a new class of alternative DOI resolvers was started by  (now discontinued ). This service was unusual in that it tried to find a non-paywalled (often author archived) version of a title and redirected the user to that instead of the publisher's version. Since then, other open-access favoring DOI resolvers have been created, notably  in October 2016 (rebranded in 2017 as  While traditional DOI resolvers solely rely on the Handle System, alternative DOI resolvers first consult multiple Open Access resources such as institutional libraries with the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH), or indexing services  based in OAI-PMH, such as BASE (Bielefeld Academic Search Engine).
An alternative to HTTP proxies is to use one of a number of add-ons and plug-ins for browsers, thereby avoiding the conversion of the DOIs to URLs, which depend on domain names and may be subject to change, while still allowing the DOI to be treated as a normal hyperlink. A disadvantage of this approach for publishers is that, at least at present, most users will be encountering the DOIs in a browser, mail reader, or other software which does not have one of these plug-ins installed.

IDF organizational structure
The International DOI Foundation (IDF), a non-profit organization created in 1997, is the governance body of the DOI system. It safeguards all intellectual property rights relating to the DOI system, manages common operational features, and supports the development and promotion of the DOI system. The IDF ensures that any improvements made to the DOI system (including creation, maintenance, registration, resolution and policymaking of DOI names) are available to any DOI registrant. It also prevents third parties from imposing additional licensing requirements beyond those of the IDF on users of the DOI system.
The IDF is controlled by a Board elected by the members of the Foundation, with an appointed Managing Agent who is responsible for co-ordinating and planning its activities. Membership is open to all organizations with an interest in electronic publishing and related enabling technologies. The IDF holds annual open meetings on the topics of DOI and related issues.
Registration agencies, appointed by the IDF, provide services to DOI registrants: they allocate DOI prefixes, register DOI names, and provide the necessary infrastructure to allow registrants to declare and maintain metadata and state data. Registration agencies are also expected to actively promote the widespread adoption of the DOI system, to cooperate with the IDF in the development of the DOI system as a whole, and to provide services on behalf of their specific user community. A list of current RAs is maintained by the International DOI Foundation. The IDF is recognized as one of the federated registrars for the Handle System by the DONA Foundation (of which the IDF is a board member), and is responsible for assigning Handle System prefixes under the top-level 10 prefix.
Registration agencies generally charge a fee to assign a new DOI name; parts of these fees are used to support the IDF. The DOI system overall, through the IDF, operates on a not-for-profit cost recovery basis.

Standardization
The DOI system is an international standard developed by the International Organization for Standardization in its technical committee on identification and description, TC46/SC9. The Draft International Standard ISO/DIS 26324, Information and documentation – Digital Object Identifier System met the ISO requirements for approval. The relevant ISO Working Group later submitted an edited version to ISO for distribution as an FDIS (Final Draft International Standard) ballot, which was approved by 100% of those voting in a ballot closing on 15 November 2010. The final standard was published on 23 April 2012.
DOI is a registered URI under the info URI scheme specified by IETF RFC 4452. info:doi/ is the infoURI Namespace of Digital Object Identifiers.
The DOI syntax is a NISO standard, first standardized in 2000, ANSI/NISO Z39.84-2005 Syntax for the Digital Object Identifier.
The maintainers of the DOI system have registered a DOI namespace for URNs.

See also
Notes
References
External links

Official website
DOI Resources from DOI.org, including Factsheets, FAQs,  and more
shortDOI Service — A shortening service offered by the DOI Foundation that creates aliases for existing DOI® names of the form 10/abcde
Crossref Metadata Search from CrossRef.org
Crossref Simple Text Query from CrossRef.org

================================================================================

# GEOSS

The Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS) was built by the Group on Earth Observations (GEO) on the basis of a 10-Year Implementation Plan running from 2005 to 2015. GEOSS seeks to connect the producers of environmental data and decision-support tools with the end users of these products, with the aim of enhancing the relevance of Earth observations to global issues. GEOSS aims to produce a global public infrastructure that generates comprehensive, near-real-time environmental data, information and analyses for a wide range of users. The Secretariat Director of Geoss is Barbara Ryan.

Earth observation systems
Earth observation systems consist of instruments and models designed to measure, monitor and predict the physical, chemical and biological aspects of the Earth system. Buoys floating in the oceans monitor temperature and salinity; meteorological stations and balloons record air quality and rainwater trends; sonar and radar systems estimate fish and bird populations; seismic and Global Positioning System (GPS) stations record movements in the Earth's crust and interior; some 60-plus high-tech environmental satellites scan the planet from space; powerful computerized models generate simulations and forecasts; and early warning systems issue alerts to vulnerable populations.
These various systems have typically operated in isolation from one another. In recent years, however, sophisticated new technologies for gathering vast quantities of near-real-time and high-resolution Earth observation data have become operational. At the same time, improved forecasting models and decision-support tools are increasingly allowing decision makers and other users of Earth observations to fully exploit this widening stream of information.
With investments in Earth observations now reaching a critical mass, it has become possible to link diverse observing systems together to paint a full picture of the Earth's condition. Because the costs and logistics of expanding Earth observations are daunting for any single nation, linking systems together through international cooperation also offers cost savings.

Implementation
As a networked system, GEOSS is owned by all of the GEO Members and Participating Organizations. Partners maintain full control of the components and activities that they contribute to the system of systems. Implementation is being pursued through a Work Plan consisting of over 70 tasks. Each task supports one of the nine societal-benefit or four transverse areas and is carried out by interested Members and Participating Organizations. Governments and organizations have also advanced GEOSS by contributing a variety of “Early Achievements”; these “First 100 Steps to GEOSS” were presented to the 2007 Cape Town Ministerial Summit.
Interlinking observation systems requires common standards for architecture and data sharing. The architecture of an Earth observation system refers to the way in which its components are designed so that they function as a whole. Each GEOSS component must be included in the GEOSS registry and configured so that it can communicate with the other participating systems. In addition, each contributor to GEOSS must subscribe to the GEO data-sharing principles, which aim to ensure the full and open exchange of data, metadata and products. These issues are fundamental to the successful operation of GEOSS.
GEOSS will disseminate information and analyses directly to users. GEO is developing the GEOPortal as a single Internet gateway to the data produced by GEOSS. The purpose of GEOPortal is to make it easier to integrate diverse data sets, identify relevant data and portals of contributing systems, and access models and other decision-support tools. For users without good access to high-speed internet, GEO has established GEONETCast, a system of four communications satellites that transmit data to low-cost receiving stations maintained by the users.
At present, GEONETCast seems still in its infancy, yet some tools have already been worked out. The GEONETCast toolbox Archived 2011-09-27 at the Wayback Machine has been made available and contains tools to access some radar altimetry, vegetation, satellite prediction and maritime information. Other useful information available through GEONETCast is vegetation and desert locust information provided under the DevCoCast project, which is a subproject of GEONETCast.

User groups
The growing demand for Earth observation data and information is the driving force behind GEOSS. The GEOSS Implementation Plan identifies nine distinct groups of users and uses, which it calls “Societal Benefit Areas”. The nine areas are disasters, health, energy, climate, water, weather, ecosystems, agriculture and biodiversity. Current and potential users include decision makers in the public and private sectors, resource managers, planners, emergency responders and scientists.

Related initiatives
GEOSS can be characterized as a contribution towards the establishment of a spatial data infrastructure. 
It is one of three related initiatives that are the subject of the GIGAS (GEOSS, INSPIRE and GMES an Action in Support) harmonization project under the auspices of the EU 7th Framework Programme.

Participating organizations
Societal Benefit Areas
Societal Benefit Areas (SBAs) are eight environmental fields of interest, all of which relate to climate, around which the GEOSS project is exerting its efforts.  These include the categories and subcategories below.
A preliminary hierarchical vocabulary has been created.  Currently, the hierarchical vocabulary structuring these societal benefit categories and their subcategories are available only in English.  However, translations have been created for French, Spanish and Italian versions by Claudia Cialone and Kristin Stock of the Centre for Geospatial Science (CGS) at the University of Nottingham, UK, with input from a number of people from the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR) in Italy, the University of Zaragoza and the European Union Joint Research Centre (JRC). Translations have also been accomplished for a Slovenian version of the SBAs by the Biotehnical faculty of the University of Ljubljana, SI.

Disaster Resilience
This SBA is meant to increase the system of the earth observation to protect human lives from natural hazards such as tsunami, sea and lake ice, floods, volcanic eruptions, wild fires etc.

Public Health Surveillance
The health SBA is meant to understand and to prevent the environmental factors related to human diseases.  Some subcategories included in this concern infectious diseases, respiratory problems, environmental stress, accidental death and injury and so forth.

Energy and mineral resource management
This SBA is concerned with the preservation and the operations related to energetic sources, and their renewability.  Some examples of subcategories for this field are: oil & gas exploration, refining and transport operations, renewable energy operations, global energy management etc..

Water resources management
The water topic is inherent to hydrological research, evaluation and management and the impact of humans on the water cycle.  The area includes subfields of interest such as global biogeochemistry, fisheries and habitat, telecommunication and navigation, predictions etc.

Infrastructure and transport
This category provides information for Earth observations support for planning, monitoring and management of infrastructure (dams, roads, rail, ports and pipelines) and transportation (air, land and sea).

Food security and sustainable agriculture
This field of concern embraces all those agricultural activities, or related subjects such as grazing systems, the economic trade of agricultural products, for monitoring the global condition of food including the prevention of desertification.

Biodiversity and ecosystem sustainability
This area is meant to disseminate information related to the investigation on the genetic diversity of species and more generally on the natural resources of the different ecosystems and the services available for their conservation.

References
Chuvieco, Emilio (2008) Earth Observation of Global Change: The Role of Satellite Remote Sensing in Monitoring the Global Environment Springer ISBN 9781402063572 page 10
Luzeaux, Dominique; Ruaul, Jean-René (eds) (2013) Systems of Systems John Wiley & Sons ISBN 9781118619803 pg 215-218

External links
official website Archived 2020-09-19 at the Wayback Machine

================================================================================

# World Ocean Database Project

The World Ocean Database Project, or WOD, was established by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC). The project leader was Sydney Levitus, also director of the International Council for Science (ICSU) World Data Center (WDC) for Oceanography, Silver Spring. Sydney Levitus retired in 2013. In recognition of the success of the IOC Global Oceanographic Data Archaeological and Rescue Project (GODAR project), a proposal was presented at the 16th Session of the Committee on International Oceanographic Data and Information Exchange (IODE), which was held in Lisbon, Portugal, in October–November 2000, to establish the World Ocean Database Project. This project is intended to stimulate the international exchange of modern oceanographic data, encourage the development of regional oceanographic databases, and implement regional quality control procedures. After the Portugal meeting, the IODE endorsed this new Project, and the IOC subsequently approved this project in June 2001.
The World Ocean Database represents the world's largest collection of ocean profile-plankton data available internationally without restriction. Data comes from the: (a) Sixty-five National Oceanographic Data Centers and nine Designated National Agencies (DNAs) (in Croatia, Finland, Georgia, Malaysia, Romania, Senegal, Sweden, Tanzania, and Ukraine), (b) International Ocean Observing Projects such as the completed World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) and Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS), as well as currently active programs such as CLIVAR and Argo, (c) International Ocean Data Management Projects such as the IOC/IODE Global Oceanographic Data Archaeology and Rescue Project (GODAR), and (d) Real-time Ocean Observing Systems such as the IOC/IODE Global Temperature-Salinity Profile Project (GTSPP). All ocean data acquired by WDC Silver Spring – USA are considered part of the WDC archive and are freely available as public domain data.

Comparison of World Ocean Databases
The World Ocean Database was first released in 1994 and updates have been released approximately every four years: 1998, 2001, and 2005. The most recent World Ocean Database series, WOD09, was released in September 2009. WOD09 has more than 9 million temperature and 3.6 million salinity profiles. The table compares the number of stations by instrument type in WOD09 with previous NODC/WDC global ocean databases.

Instrument Types
Ocean profile, plankton data, and metadata are available in the World Ocean Database for
29 depth-dependent variables (physical and biochemical) and 11 instruments types: Ocean Station Data (OSD), Mechanical Bathythermograph (MBT), Expendable Bathythermograph (XBT), Conductivity, Temperature, Depth (CTD), Undulating Oceanographic Recorder (UOR), Profiling Float (PFL), Moored Buoy (MRB), Drifting Buoy (DRB), Gliders (GLD), Autonomous Pinniped Bathythermograph (APB).

Word Ocean Database Products
The data in the World Ocean Database are made available through the online search and retrieval system known as WODselect. The World Ocean Atlas (WOAselect) series is a set of gridded (1° grid), climatological, objectively analyzed fields of the variables in the World Ocean Database. The WOAselect is a selection tool by which the user can designate a geographic area, depth, and oceanographic variable to view climatological means or related statistics for a given variable at the requested depth for the requested geographic area.

See also
Geochemical Ocean Sections Study (GEOSECS)
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project (GLODAP)
Ocean heat content
World Ocean Atlas (WOA)
World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE)

References
External links
GODAR project and the World Ocean Database Project
International Council for Science (ICSU)
International Oceanographic Data and Information Exchange (IODE)
NODC Ocean Climate Laboratory datasets and products
World Data Center system
World Ocean Atlas 2009 (WOA09)
World Ocean Database 2009 (WOD09)
World Ocean Database Select (WODselect)

================================================================================

# CLIVAR

CLIVAR (climate and ocean: variability, predictability and change) is one of six projects of the World Climate Research Programme. Its purpose is to describe and understand climate variability and predictability on seasonal to centennial time-scales, identify the physical processes responsible for climate change and develop modeling and predictive capabilities for climate modelling.

History
The following is an approximate timeline of CLIVAR and its precedents:

1985: The World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) initiated the TOGA (Tropical-Ocean Global Atmosphere Project) (1985-1995) to study interannual variability driven by the ocean-atmosphere system in the tropics.
1990: The WCRP began the first observational phase of the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (1990-1997)
1991: The Joint Scientific Committee (JSC) of the WCRP called on a group of experts to come together and consider the possible future directions for climate research, building on the foundation laid by TOGA and WOCE.
1992: The deliberations of the Joint Scientific Committee were published in 1992 in a brochure entitled ‘CLIVAR – a study of Climate Variability and Predictability’.
1993: The WCRP JSC decided to undertake CLIVAR as a major activity.
1995: CLIVAR was officially launched, initially as a 15-year project. The launch coincided with the end of TOGA.
1997: The first CLIVAR implementation plan was published.

Panels and working groups
CLIVAR has a number of panels and working groups based on the study of climate variability and predictability of different components of the global climate system.

Global panels
CLIVAR has four global panels:

Global Synthesis and Observation Panel
Climate Dynamics Panel
Ocean Model Development Panel
CLIVAR/GEWEX Monsoons Panel

Regional panels
Regional panels focus on specific aspects of the climate system. Since the different regions of the ocean are qualitatively different, and given the important role of the oceans in controlling climate over the interannual, decadal, and centennial scales considered by CLIVAR, the subdivision into panels is largely based on regions of the ocean system:

Atlantic Region Panel
CLIVAR /CliC Northern Oceans Region Panel
CLIVAR/CliC/SCAR Southern Ocean Region Panel
CLIVAR/IOC-GOOS Indian Ocean Region Panel
Pacific Region Panel

Research foci
CLIVAR RFs are temporary 3-5 years groups that drive priority climate research through bottom-up efforts, foster cross-panel and WCRP-wide collaboration, and engage new scientists. The current RFs are:

Tropical Basin Interaction
Marine Heatwaves in the Global Ocean

See also
VAMOS Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land Study

References
External links
Official website

================================================================================

# Geochemical Ocean Sections Study

The Geochemical Ocean Sections Study (GEOSECS) was a global survey of the three-dimensional distributions of chemical, isotopic, and radiochemical tracers in the ocean. A key objective was to investigate the deep thermohaline circulation of the ocean, using chemical tracers, including radiotracers, to establish the pathways taken by this. 
Measurements included those of physical oceanographic quantities such as temperature, salinity, pressure and density, chemical / biological quantities such as total inorganic carbon, alkalinity, nitrate, phosphate, silicic acid, oxygen and apparent oxygen utilisation (AOU), and radiochemical / isotopic quantities such as carbon-13, carbon-14 and tritium.

Program history
The GEOSECS program began in 1967 when Henry Stommel recognized that geochemical tracers could be used to study marine mixing and circulation patterns. In 1968, Stommel met with Wallace Broecker, Harmon Craig, and Karl Karekin Turekian to discuss and plan the formation of a geochemical ocean program. The group grew over the following year, with an initial GEOSECS panel of:

Wallace Broecker (Lamont-Doherty)
Harmon Craig (Scripps)
H. Gote Ostlund (University of Miami)
P. Kilho Park (Oregon State University)
Joseph Reid (Scripps)
Derek Spencer (Woods Hole)
Henry Stommel (MIT)
Taro Takahashi (Lamont-Doherty)
Karl Turekian (Yale)
Herbert Volchock (Atomic Energy Commission)
Arnold E. Bainbridge of Scripps was selected as the GEOSECS Operations Group director and maintained responsibility for shipboard operations and data processing.
Instrumentation and methodology for science at sea were developed during a series of preliminary cruises from 1969-1972. It was on the practice run of Scripp's Antipode Expedition (Leg 15) in 1971 that the deep-water Neil Brown CTD was successfully deployed to 5,000 metres (16,000 ft). Continuous CTD data presented an immediate discovery of a density discontinuity between Pacific Deep Water and Antarctic bottom water.
Expeditions undertaken during GEOSECS took place in the Atlantic Ocean from July 1972 to May 1973, in the Pacific Ocean from August 1973 to June 1974, and in the Indian Ocean from December 1977 to March 1978.

See also
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project (GLODAP)
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS)
World Ocean Atlas (WOA)
World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE)

References
External links
GEOSECS data, International Research Institute for Climate and Society
GEOSECS data, Ocean Data View
Rivers of the Sea: The Story of GEOSECS, 1975 documentary about the study

================================================================================

# Global Ocean Data Analysis Project

The Global Ocean Data Analysis Project (GLODAP) is a synthesis project bringing together oceanographic data, featuring two major releases as of 2018. The central goal of GLODAP is to generate a global climatology of the World Ocean's carbon cycle for use in studies of both its natural and anthropogenically forced states.  GLODAP is funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U.S. Department of Energy, and the National Science Foundation.
The first GLODAP release (v1.1) was produced from data collected during the 1990s by research cruises on the World Ocean Circulation Experiment, Joint Global Ocean Flux Study and Ocean-Atmosphere Exchange Study programmes. The second GLODAP release (v2) extended the first using data from cruises from 2000 to 2013. The data are available both as individual "bottle data" from sample sites, and as interpolated fields on a standard longitude, latitude, depth grid.

Dataset
The GLODAPv1.1 climatology contains analysed fields of "present day" (1990s) dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), alkalinity, carbon-14 (14C), CFC-11 and CFC-12.  The fields consist of three-dimensional, objectively-analysed global grids at 1° horizontal resolution, interpolated onto 33 standardised vertical intervals from the surface (0 m) to the abyssal seafloor (5500 m).  In terms of temporal resolution, the relative scarcity of the source data mean that, unlike the World Ocean Atlas, averaged fields are only produced for the annual time-scale.  The GLODAP climatology is missing data in certain oceanic provinces including the Arctic Ocean, the Caribbean Sea, the Mediterranean Sea and Maritime Southeast Asia.
Additionally, analysis has attempted to separate natural from anthropogenic DIC, to produce fields of pre-industrial (18th century) DIC and "present day" anthropogenic CO2.  This separation allows estimation of the magnitude of the ocean sink for anthropogenic CO2, and is important for studies of phenomena such as ocean acidification.  However, as anthropogenic DIC is chemically and physically identical to natural DIC, this separation is difficult.  GLODAP used a mathematical technique known as C* (C-star) to deconvolute anthropogenic from natural DIC (there are a number of alternative methods).  This uses information about ocean biogeochemistry and CO2 surface disequilibrium together with other ocean tracers including carbon-14, CFC-11 and CFC-12 (which indicate water mass age) to try to separate out natural CO2 from that added during the ongoing anthropogenic transient.  The technique is not straightforward and has associated errors, although it is gradually being refined to improve it.  Its findings are generally supported by independent predictions made by dynamic models.
The GLODAPv2 climatology largely repeats the earlier format, but makes use of the large number of observations of the ocean's carbon cycle made over the intervening period (2000–2013). The analysed "present-day" fields in the resulting dataset are normalised to year 2002. Anthropogenic carbon was estimated in GLODAPv2 using a "transit-time distribution" (TTD) method (an approach using a Green's function). In addition to updated fields of DIC (total and anthropogenic) and alkalinity, GLODAPv2 includes fields of seawater pH and calcium carbonate saturation state (Ω; omega). The latter is a non-dimensional number calculated by dividing the local carbonate ion concentration by the ambient saturation concentration for calcium carbonate (for the biomineral polymorphs calcite and aragonite), and relates to an oceanographic property, the carbonate compensation depth. Values of this below 1 indicate undersaturation, and potential dissolution, while values above 1 indicate supersaturation, and relative stability.

Gallery
The following panels show sea surface concentrations of fields prepared by GLODAPv1.1. The "pre-industrial" is the 18th century, while "present-day" is approximately the 1990s.

The following panels show sea surface concentrations of fields prepared by GLODAPv2. The "pre-industrial" is the 18th century, while "present-day" is normalised to 2002. Note that these properties are shown in mass units (per kilogram of seawater) rather than the volume units (per cubic metre of seawater) used in the GLODAPv1.1 panels.

See also
Biogeochemical cycle
Biological pump
Continental shelf pump
Geochemical Ocean Sections Study
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
Ocean acidification
Solubility pump
World Ocean Atlas
World Ocean Circulation Experiment

References
External links
GLODAP website, Bjerknes Climate Data Centre
GLODAP v1.1 website, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
GLODAP v2 website, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

================================================================================

# Ocean Data View

Ocean Data View (ODV) is a proprietary, freely available, software package for the analysis and visualization of oceanographic and meteorological data sets.
ODV is used by a large number of oceanographers. The UNESCO Ocean Teacher project employs ODV as one of its main analysis and display tools. ODV is used to display and analyze data from several oceanographic projects such as Argo, World Ocean Circulation Experiment, World Ocean Database Project, SeaDataNet, World Ocean Atlas, and Medar/Medatlas projects.
Ocean Data View includes also options that permit to perform objective analysis thanks to the add-on DIVA software.

Notes and references
External links

================================================================================

# Analysis

Analysis (pl.: analyses) is the process of breaking a complex topic or substance into smaller parts in order to gain a better understanding of it. The technique has been applied in the study of mathematics and logic since before Aristotle (384–322 BC), though analysis as a formal concept is a relatively recent development.
The word comes from the Ancient Greek ἀνάλυσις (analysis, "a breaking-up" or "an untying" from ana- "up, throughout" and lysis "a loosening"). From it also comes the word's plural, analyses.
As a formal concept, the method has variously been ascribed to René Descartes (Discourse on the Method), and Galileo Galilei. It has also been ascribed to Isaac Newton, in the form of a practical method of physical discovery (which he did not name).
The converse of analysis is synthesis: putting the pieces back together again in a new or different whole.

Science and technology
Chemistry
The field of chemistry uses analysis in three ways: to identify the components of a particular chemical compound (qualitative analysis), to identify the proportions of components in a mixture (quantitative analysis), and to break down chemical processes and examine chemical reactions between elements of matter. For an example of its use, analysis of the concentration of elements is important in managing a nuclear reactor, so nuclear scientists will analyze neutron activation to develop discrete measurements within vast samples. A matrix can have a considerable effect on the way a chemical analysis is conducted and the quality of its results. Analysis can be done manually or with a device.

Types of Analysis
Qualitative Analysis
It is concerned with which components are in a given sample or compound.
Example: Precipitation reaction
Quantitative Analysis
It is to determine the quantity of individual component present in a given sample or compound.
Example: To find concentration by uv-spectrophotometer.

Isotopes
Chemists can use isotope analysis to assist analysts with issues in anthropology, archeology, food chemistry, forensics, geology, and a host of other questions of physical science. Analysts can discern the origins of natural and man-made isotopes in the study of environmental radioactivity.

Computer science
Requirements analysis – encompasses those tasks that go into determining the needs or conditions to meet for a new or altered product, taking account of the possibly conflicting requirements of the various stakeholders, such as beneficiaries or users.
Competitive analysis (online algorithm) – shows how online algorithms perform and demonstrates the power of randomization in algorithms
Lexical analysis – the process of processing an input sequence of characters and producing as output a sequence of symbols
Object-oriented analysis and design – à la Booch
Program analysis (computer science) – the process of automatically analysing the behavior of computer programs
Semantic analysis (computer science) – a pass by a compiler that adds semantical information to the parse tree and performs certain checks
Static code analysis – the analysis of computer software that is performed without actually executing programs built from that
Structured systems analysis and design methodology – à la Yourdon
Syntax analysis – a process in compilers that recognizes the structure of programming languages, also known as parsing
Worst-case execution time – determines the longest time that a piece of software can take to run

Engineering
Analysts in the field of engineering look at requirements, structures, mechanisms, systems and dimensions. Electrical engineers analyse systems in electronics. Life cycles and system failures are broken down and studied by engineers. It is also looking at different factors incorporated within the design.

Mathematics
Modern mathematical analysis is the study of infinite processes. It is the branch of mathematics that includes calculus.  It can be applied in the study of classical concepts of mathematics, such as real numbers, complex variables, trigonometric functions, and algorithms, or of non-classical concepts like constructivism, harmonics, infinity, and vectors.
Florian Cajori explains in A History of Mathematics (1893) the difference between modern and ancient mathematical analysis, as distinct from logical analysis, as follows:

The terms synthesis and analysis are used in mathematics in a more special sense than in logic. In ancient mathematics they had a different meaning from what they now have. The oldest definition of mathematical analysis as opposed to synthesis is that given in [appended to] Euclid, XIII. 5, which in all probability was framed by Eudoxus: "Analysis is the obtaining of the thing sought by assuming it and so reasoning up to an admitted truth; synthesis is the obtaining of the thing sought by reasoning up to the inference and proof of it." 

The analytic method is not conclusive, unless all operations involved in it are known to be reversible. To remove all doubt, the Greeks, as a rule, added to the analytic process a synthetic one, consisting of a reversion of all operations occurring in the analysis. Thus the aim of analysis was to aid in the discovery of synthetic proofs or solutions.

James Gow uses a similar argument as Cajori, with the following clarification, in his A Short History of Greek Mathematics (1884):

The synthetic proof proceeds by shewing that the proposed new truth involves certain admitted truths. An analytic proof begins by an assumption, upon which a synthetic reasoning is founded. The Greeks distinguished theoretic from problematic analysis. A theoretic analysis is of the following kind. To prove that A is B, assume first that A is B. If so, then, since B is C and C is D and D is E, therefore A is E. If this be known a falsity, A is not B. But if this be a known truth and all the intermediate propositions be convertible, then the reverse process, A is E, E is D, D is C, C is B, therefore A is B, constitutes a synthetic proof of the original theorem. Problematic analysis is applied in all cases where it is proposed to construct a figure which is assumed to satisfy a given condition. The problem is then converted into some theorem which is involved in the condition and which is proved synthetically, and the steps of this synthetic proof taken backwards are a synthetic solution of the problem.

Psychotherapy
Psychoanalysis – seeks to elucidate connections among unconscious components of patients' mental processes
Transactional analysis
Transactional analysis is used by therapists to try to gain a better understanding of the unconscious.  It focuses on understanding and intervening human behavior.

Signal processing
Finite element analysis – a computer simulation technique used in engineering analysis
Independent component analysis
Link quality analysis – the analysis of signal quality
Path quality analysis
Fourier analysis

Statistics
In statistics, the term analysis may refer to any method used
for data analysis. Among the many such methods, some are:

Analysis of variance (ANOVA) – a collection of statistical models and their associated procedures which compare means by splitting the overall observed variance into different parts
Boolean analysis – a method to find deterministic dependencies between variables in a sample, mostly used in exploratory data analysis
Cluster analysis – techniques for finding groups (called clusters), based on some measure of proximity or similarity
Factor analysis – a method to construct models describing a data set of observed variables in terms of a smaller set of unobserved variables (called factors)
Meta-analysis – combines the results of several studies that address a set of related research hypotheses
Multivariate analysis – analysis of data involving several variables, such as by factor analysis, regression analysis, or principal component analysis
Principal component analysis – transformation of a sample of correlated variables into uncorrelated variables (called principal components), mostly used in exploratory data analysis
Regression analysis – techniques for analysing the relationships between several predictive variables and one or more outcomes in the data
Scale analysis (statistics) – methods to analyse survey data by scoring responses on a numeric scale
Sensitivity analysis – the study of how the variation in the output of a model depends on variations in the inputs
Sequential analysis – evaluation of sampled data as it is collected, until the criterion of a stopping rule is met
Spatial analysis – the study of entities using geometric or geographic properties
Time-series analysis – methods that attempt to understand a sequence of data points spaced apart at uniform time intervals

Business
Financial statement analysis – the analysis of the accounts and the economic prospects of a firm
Financial analysis – refers to an assessment of the viability, stability, and profitability of a business, sub-business or project
Gap analysis – involves the comparison of actual performance with potential or desired performance of an organization
Business analysis – involves identifying the needs and determining the solutions to business problems
Price analysis – involves the breakdown of a price to a unit figure
Market analysis – consists of suppliers and customers, and price is determined by the interaction of supply and demand
Sum-of-the-parts analysis – method of valuation of a multi-divisional company
Opportunity analysis – consists of customers trends within the industry, customer demand and experience determine purchasing behavior

Economics
Agroecosystem analysis
Input–output model if applied to a region, is called Regional Impact Multiplier System

Government
Intelligence
The field of intelligence employs analysts to break down and understand a wide array of questions. Intelligence agencies may use heuristics, inductive and deductive reasoning, social network analysis, dynamic network analysis, link analysis, and brainstorming to sort through problems they face. Military intelligence may explore issues through the use of game theory, Red Teaming, and wargaming. Signals intelligence applies cryptanalysis and frequency analysis to break codes and ciphers. Business intelligence applies theories of competitive intelligence analysis and competitor analysis to resolve questions in the marketplace. Law enforcement intelligence applies a number of theories in crime analysis.

Policy
Policy analysis – The use of statistical data to predict the effects of policy decisions made by governments and agencies
Policy analysis includes a systematic process to find the most efficient and effective option to address the current situation.
Qualitative analysis – The use of anecdotal evidence to predict the effects of policy decisions or, more generally, influence policy decisions

Humanities and social sciences
Linguistics
Linguistics explores individual languages and language in general. It breaks language down and analyses its component parts: theory, sounds and their meaning, utterance usage, word origins, the history of words, the meaning of words and word combinations, sentence construction, basic construction beyond the sentence level, stylistics, and conversation. It examines the above using statistics and modeling, and semantics. It analyses language in context of anthropology, biology, evolution, geography, history, neurology, psychology, and sociology. It also takes the applied approach, looking at individual language development and clinical issues.

Literature
Literary criticism is the analysis of literature. The focus can be as diverse as the analysis of Homer or Freud. While not all literary-critical methods are primarily analytical in nature, the main approach to the teaching of literature in the west since the mid-twentieth century, literary formal analysis or close reading, is. This method, rooted in the academic movement labelled The New Criticism, approaches texts – chiefly short poems such as sonnets, which by virtue of their small size and significant complexity lend themselves well to this type of analysis – as units of discourse that can be understood in themselves, without reference to biographical or historical frameworks. This method of analysis breaks up the text linguistically in a study of prosody (the formal analysis of meter) and phonic effects such as alliteration and rhyme, and cognitively in examination of the interplay of syntactic structures, figurative language, and other elements of the poem that work to produce its larger effects.

Music
Musical analysis – a process attempting to answer the question "How does this music work?"
Musical Analysis is a study of how the composers use the notes together to compose music. Those studying music will find differences with each composer's musical analysis, which differs depending on the culture and history of music studied. An analysis of music is meant to simplify the music for you.
Schenkerian analysis
Schenkerian analysis is a collection of music analysis that focuses on the production of the graphic representation. This includes both analytical procedure as well as the notational style. Simply put, it analyzes tonal music which includes all chords and tones within a composition.

Philosophy
Philosophical analysis – a general term for the techniques used by philosophers
Philosophical analysis refers to the clarification and composition of words put together and the entailed meaning behind them. Philosophical analysis dives deeper into the meaning of words and seeks to clarify that meaning by contrasting the various definitions. It is the study of reality, justification of claims, and the analysis of various concepts. Branches of philosophy include logic, justification, metaphysics, values and ethics.  If questions can be answered empirically, meaning it can be answered by using the senses, then it is not considered philosophical. Non-philosophical questions also include events that happened in the past, or questions science or mathematics can answer.
Analysis is the name of a prominent journal in philosophy.

Other
Aura analysis – a pseudoscientific technique in which supporters of the method claim that the body's aura, or energy field is analysed
Bowling analysis – Analysis of the performance of cricket players
Lithic analysis – the analysis of stone tools using basic scientific techniques
Lithic analysis is most often used by archeologists in determining which types of tools were used at a given time period pertaining to current artifacts discovered.
Protocol analysis – a means for extracting persons' thoughts while they are performing a task

See also
Formal analysis
Metabolism in biology
Methodology
Scientific method
Synthesis (disambiguation) – list of terms related to synthesis, the converse of analysis

References
External links

Analysis at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project
"Analysis" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Analysis at PhilPapers

================================================================================

# DIVA software

DIVA (Data-Interpolating Variational Analysis) allows the spatial interpolation/gridding of data (analysis) in an optimal way, comparable to optimal interpolation (OI), taking into account uncertainties on observations. In comparison to standard OI, used in Data assimilation, DIVA, when applied to ocean data, takes into account coastlines, sub-basins and advection because of its variational formulation on the real domain. Calculations are highly optimized and rely on a finite element resolution. Tools to generate the finite element mesh are provided as well as tools to optimize the parameters of the analysis. Quality control of data can be performed and error fields can be calculated. Also detrending of data is possible. Finally 3D and 4D extensions are included with emphasis on direct computations of climatologies from ODV  spreadsheet files.
The software whose first version was available since 1996, can now be downloaded at the DIVA Archived 2017-12-01 at the Wayback Machine site and is the reference tool for calculating climatologies within the SeaDataNet projects. It has also been included as the state-of-the art gridding method in Ocean Data View.
The classical DIVA version is now superseded by an N-dimensional implementation:

== Notes and references ==

================================================================================

# SOCCOM project

The Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling (SOCCOM) project is a large scale National Science Foundation funded research project based at Princeton University that started in September 2014. The project aims to increase the understanding of the Southern Ocean and the role it plays in factors such as climate, as well as educate new scientists with oceanic observation.
In total, oceanographers and climatologists from thirteen research institutions collaborate in three distinct teams, each of which with a primary focus; the teams include observations, broader impacts, and modeling.
The project makes use of Argo float technology to monitor the temperature, salinity, and velocity of the ocean to a depth of 2000 meters. The SOCCOM regional ARGO array is being fitted with biogeochemical sensors to measure additional components such as oxygen, nutrients, pH, chlorophyll, and particulates. The floats are free drifting pods that are deposited at specific sites where they submerge themselves and drift, all while gathering useful data. Argo floats are ideal for this project due to the often harsh conditions of the Southern Ocean, where manned expeditions can be treacherous.

Mechanisms and Importance of Southern Ocean on Global Scale
The Southern Ocean is under study due to the unique phenomena that occur within and around it. For example, despite only comprising about 30% of the Earth's ocean area, the Southern Ocean accounts for approximately half of the oceanic carbon uptake, as well as the majority of the oceanic heat uptake, induced by anthropogenic activities. These characteristics are believed to be the result of a unique oceanic circulation found in the South Ocean. 

Cold water upwells from the deep, and this water is deficient in carbon. Once this water comes into contact with the warmer atmosphere, the anthropogenic carbon (CO2) and heat is absorbed into the ocean. The now warm and carbon containing surface water is then moved by means of the Ekman transport. Along with this transport, nutrients are brought along to lower latitudes where the ecosystems depend on them. After the transport, the water subducts, where the carbon and heat mix with the deeper mixed layers. The excess carbon sequestered by the ocean results in ocean acidification, which has an especially large impact on the Southern Ocean since this ocean basin naturally has lower calcium carbonate concentrations. The increasing acidity will decrease the calcium carbonate concentrations even more making it difficult for calcifying organisms to develop and survive. The decline of calcifying organisms will have serious repercussions for the rest of the food web in the Southern Ocean, so it is important to quantify how much this ocean is acidifying.

Role of Argo Floats in SOCCOM
The better quantification of biogeochemical variables in the oceans has been an ongoing effort and primarily this has been done with the collection of water samples via ships that are later analyzed in a lab. The benefits of measurements obtained from ships are that they are accurate and have a high vertical resolution. However, the samples collected lack spatial and temporal resolution and are biased based on where and when the ship is able to sample. This is why Argo floats are used for the SOCCOM project because they are able to collect data in the Southern Ocean where ships do not have access to, and they are able to be in this environment when the conditions are too harsh for ships. Argo floats are also able to collect data on large temporal and spatial scales, which is important for determining how biogeochemical processes are changing in the Southern Ocean and the mechanisms driving the changes

Variables Measured by Argo Floats in SOCCOM
Besides the basic CTD (Conductivity Temperature and Depth) Profilers that are found on most floats, SOCCOM floats are outfitted with additional biogeochemical sensors that measure oxygen, nitrate, pH, and chlorophyll. With the expansion of new biogeochemical sensors has come the need to develop methods to make the sensors as accurate as possible.

Oxygen measurements
New methods are being developed to make the oxygen sensors more accurate including the frequent calibration of the sensors when the floats are at the surface. Oxygen measurements collected by floats with this calibration process improves the measurements to within a 1% accuracy in reference to measurements determined from the Winkler test for dissolved oxygen. The amount of dissolved oxygen in the water represents the amount of primary productivity and respiration of the region. This link between oxygen levels and biological processes means that oxygen and carbon are related, and proportions of oxygen to carbon are determined via the Redfield Ratio. This means that with measurements of dissolved oxygen, carbon concentrations can also be determined.

pH measurements
The acidity of the water is measured with ion sensitive pH sensors attached to the Argo floats. The amphoteric oxide coating of the transistor conduction channel allows for the surface charge to change depending on pH. This dependency of surface change on pH allows for the pH of the solution to be determined. The pH measurements of the Southern Ocean are of particular interest to scientists because this ocean sequesters a large amount of carbon dioxide, which results in the increasing acidification of the water as the carbon dioxide reacts with water to form carbonic acid. Therefore, the response of the acidity of the Southern Ocean in relation to the amount of carbon dioxide it sequesters is an objective of the SOCCOM project. 

Chlorophyll
Chlorophyll is a proxy for phytoplankton abundance, therefore mapping of chlorophyll results in a greater understanding of how nutrients are cycling in an area. When chlorophyll is hit with a light of certain wavelength, it emits a higher wavelength back, so to measure chlorophyll, Argo floats are outfitted with sensors that emit light at the specific wavelength and then record the wavelength returned emitted wavelength. From the wavelength of emitted light, the distribution of chlorophyll can be determined.

Nitrate
Nitrate is an important limiting nutrient for phytoplankton and nitrate abundance can determine limits of phytoplankton biomass in the ocean. Nitrate is measured with a UV spectrometer since nitrate is absorbed in a distinct spectrum that can be used to calculate nitrate concentrations.

References
External links

================================================================================

# Bibcode (identifier)

The bibcode (also known as the refcode) is a compact identifier used by several astronomical data systems to uniquely specify literature references.

Adoption
The Bibliographic Reference Code (refcode) was originally developed to be used in SIMBAD and the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED), but it became a de facto standard and is now used more widely, for example, by the NASA Astrophysics Data System, which coined and prefers the term "bibcode".

Format
The code has a fixed length of 19 characters and has the form

where YYYY is the four-digit year of the reference and JJJJJ is a code indicating where the reference was published. In the case of a journal reference, VVVV is the volume number, M indicates the section of the journal where the reference was published (e.g., L for a letters section), PPPP gives the starting page number, and A is the first letter of the last name of the first author. Periods (.) are used to fill unused fields and to pad fields out to their fixed length if too short; padding is done on the right for the publication code and on the left for the volume number and page number. Page numbers greater than 9999 are continued in the M column. The 6-digit article ID numbers (in lieu of page numbers) used by the Physical Review publications since the late 1990s are treated as follows: The first two digits of the article ID, corresponding to the issue number, are converted to a lower-case letter (01 = a, etc.) and inserted into column M. The remaining four digits are used in the page field.

Examples
Some examples of bibcodes are:

See also
Digital object identifier

== References ==

================================================================================

# Float (oceanographic instrument platform)

A float (not to be confused with a drifter) is an oceanographic instrument platform used for making subsurface measurements in the ocean without the need for a ship, propeller, or a person operating it. Floats measure the physical and chemical aspects of the ocean in detail, such as measuring the direction and speed of water or the temperature and salinity. A float will descend to a predetermined depth where it will be neutrally buoyant. Once a certain amount of time has passed, most floats will rise back to the surface by increasing its buoyancy so it can transmit the data it collected to a satellite.  A float can collect data while it is neutrally buoyant or moving through the water column. Often, floats are treated as disposable, as the expense of recovering them from remote areas of the ocean is prohibitive; when the batteries fail, a float ceases to function, and drifts at depth until it runs aground or floods and sinks. In other cases, floats are deployed for a short time and recovered.

History
Floating devices with neutral buoyancy were developed independently and simultaneously by Henry Stommel in 1955  and John C. Swallow in 1955. The design of  the Swallow float allows it to stabilize itself at a given depth. However Swallow's design was the first practical one.
By late 2004 over 1500 neutrally buoyant floats were drifting at various depths of ocean waters.

Construction
These autonomous drifting vehicles typically have aluminum pressure cases on the order of one meter long.  To change the buoyancy, a pump is used to inflate or deflate an external oil bladder.  Some floats can detach a ballast to increase its buoyancy, but that can only be done once.  The weight of a float is about 20 kg without sensors.  
Floats can carry a variety of sensors to collect data.  A common sensor used is a CTD to collect data about the conductivity, temperature, and depth (which is related to pressure).  The salinity can be calculated from the measurements taken by the CTD.  Other sensors used include oxygen, nitrate, sunlight, chlorophyll, and pH sensors.  Acoustically tracked floats have a hydrophone on them to produce sound.  Without the sensors, a float can cost about $25,000 US.

Profiling floats
Profiling floats, such as APEX floats, SOLO floats (including SOLO-TREC), PROVOR floats, and Navis floats (Sea-Bird Scientific), change their buoyancy in order to move vertically through the water column in the ocean to repeatedly collect data that spans a range of depths ("profiles"). Profiling floats can have more than one sensor of the same type on it.  A sensor on top of the float will collect data better than one on the bottom if the float is moving vertically through the water column, and a sensor on the bottom will collect data better if the float is descending. These floats are capable of making a few hundred profiles to a maximum depth of 2000 meters before battery exhaustion, and transmit their data to shore via satellite communication each time they surface. Deeper diving models that can reach 6000 meters have been made, deep enough to reach the ocean floor in most locations. A major user of profiling floats is the Argo program, which aims to keep 3000 of them functioning in the ocean at any given time.

Apex floats
The Argo program uses Apex floats. These floats drift at a set depth for a period of 5 to 10 days before surfacing to transmit the data to satellites.  The float will then descend back to the determined depth.

Lagrangian floats
A Lagrangian float is similar to a Lagrangian drifter in that it is designed to follow a parcel of water, except that the Lagrangian float is capable of changing its buoyancy to collect profile data as well.  By following a parcel of water, measurements have the advective effects of water minimized to show the change of the properties of the water parcel over time.

Coastal floats
Although the coastal regions of the world are the most productive parts of the ocean, floats are not commonly used to study the coast. Floats in coastal regions are less common due to the risk of the floats being damaged by the coast or being washed ashore. A newer model for a coastal float is being developed by the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI).
These new floats sit on the seafloor between profiles. This allows the floats to resist being moved by the currents when it is not collecting data. The coastal float would collect profile data more frequently than Argo floats due to the rapidly changing coastal environment.

Non-profiling floats
Some floats are designed only to map currents at a single depth; they don't have the ability to adjust their buoyancy, so are carefully ballasted to match the water density at the desired depth.  A modern example of this type is the RAFOS float; historical versions include Swallow, ALACE, and SOFAR floats.

== References ==

================================================================================

# Unmanned underwater vehicle

Unmanned underwater vehicles (UUV), also known as underwater drones, or unmanned submarines are submersible vehicles that can operate underwater without a human occupant, either remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROUVs) or autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs).

Classifications
Remotely operated underwater vehicle
Remotely Operated Underwater Vehicles (ROUVs)  primarily replace humans in difficult underwater conditions and perform educational or industrial missions. They are manually controlled to perform tasks that include surveillance and patrolling. ROUVs cannot operate autonomously. In addition to a camera, actuators, and sensors, ROUVs often include a 'gripper' or something to grasp objects with. This may throw off the weight distribution of the vehicle, requiring manual assistance at all times. Sometimes ROUVs require additional assistance due to the importance of the task being performed. The US Navy developed a Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System (SRDRS) that can save up to 16 people up to 2000 feet underwater at a time. Such a large vehicle with the primary role of saving lives requires an operator(s).

Autonomous underwater vehicle
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are underwater vehicles that can operate without an operator. Sizes can range from just a few kilograms up to thousands of kilograms. The first AUV was created in 1957 to perform research in arctic waters for the Applied Physics Laboratory at the University of Washington. By the early 2000s, 10 different AUVs had been developed, including screw driven AUVs, underwater gliders, and Bionic AUVs. The earliest models used screw propeller thrusters while more recent models use automatic buoyancy control. The earliest model, SPURV, weighed 484 kg, went as deep as 3650 meters, and could travel for up to 5.5 hours. One of the most recent models, Deepglider, weighs 62 kg, can go as deep as 6000 meters, and can travel up to 8500 km.

History
1950s
Starting in 1957, the first uncrewed underwater vehicle (UUV) was classified as an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV), and was created in the United States to research the Arctic waters. The Special Purpose Underwater Research Vehicle (SPURV), was used by the University of Washington to collect oceanographic data until 1979 during which the development of SPURV II began to provide better movement performance and better sensing capabilities.

1970s
Scientists from the Autonomous and Control Processes Institute took interest in the developments of the AUV “SCAT” which led to the introduction of the UUVs “L1” and “L2” in 1974. “L1” and “L2” are AUV models used for the further development of technology and oceanographic mapping respectively.

1980s
Further development of the Remotely operated Vehicle (ROV) brought forth the creation of the Autonomous and Remote controlled submarine (ARCS) in 1983 by the ISE ltd. company in partnership with the “International Submarine Engineering”. ARCS was also classified as a Remotely controlled underwater vehicle (ROUV) because of its 32-bit Motorola processor which allowed for the remote control it featured. This UUV further served as a testing platform, improving on the battery life, navigational, and communicational systems having its first dive in 1987.

1990s
When the Russian Institute of Marine Technology Problems introduced the Solar Autonomous underwater vehicle (SAUV), it was the start of longer term exploration missions without the need of retrieving the UUV for maintenance. The introduction of solar panels on UUVs began with the SAUV in 1987 and was kept during the making of SAUV II. Solar panels enabled lengthier missions, with the ability to use features such as gps and high payloads more frequently due to its ease of charge.
Advancements in battery life enabled for the creation of “gliders” in 1995 which would allow for the long term dives in which the UUVs would remain submerged for weeks or even months at a time.

2000s
UUVs begin to be taken into consideration for more than testing tools for other underwater missions due to the increase number of user internationally. There was also an increase in funding for the UUV technology development. The rise in users internationally led to the increase demand for UUV technology outside of government agencies and the commercial sale of UUVs started, expanding the research based use of the UUV to a more industrial/commercial based use.

2016 incident
On December 16, 2016, a Chinese warship in South China Sea seized an underwater drone that was in the process of being retrieved by the U.S. Navy survey ship USNS Bowditch. A day later, the Chinese Defense Ministry said it will return the drone to the United States. The Pentagon confirmed that and says the drone, used for gathering weather and temperature data, is not armed. The drone was returned several days later.

2020s
In early 2023, following successful  military use of uncrewed surface vehicles (USV) by Ukraine in the Black Sea in October and November 2022, the Ukrainian Navy began to employ an uncrewed underwater vehicle (UUV), a maritime drone, called the Toloka TLK-150. A small robotic submarine, the TLK-150 is 2.5 m (8 ft 2 in) long, with twin thrusters mounted on wing-like stabilizers. Although "smaller than previous Ukrainian maritime drones [and with a] much shorter range and slower speed, [it] should make up for that by being more stealthy and more survivable. An advanced version has a range of 2000 kilometres and a payload approaching 5000 kg of explosives and has been effective in destroying vessels and infrastructure such as the Kerch Bridge.
TLK-150 is developed by Brave1, which has designs for two larger UUVs.  The TLK-400 is longer at 4–6 m (13–20 ft) and "has a much larger diameter body inferring greater range and payload. The TLK-1000 would be much larger again, up to 12 meters (40 feet) in length and with four thrusters."
In April 2024, Ukraine has announced that it was testing an “uncrewed submarine” that can be fitted with a warhead, stealth features and sensors, carry up to 10 divers, carry six torpedoes or missiles and has an endurance of 54 hours/1000 kms, with a speed of up to 50 kms/h underwater.
In May 2024, Northrop Grumman unveiled an underwater drone named the Manta Ray, developed for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Modeled after the manta ray, this drone underwent four years of development to mimic the movements of this oceanic creature. The product is engineered for extended-duration and long-range military operations with minimal human intervention. Additionally, it features the capability to harness energy from the ocean. Manta Ray successfully completed full-scale at-sea trials off the coast of Southern California in February and March 2024. According to DARPA, Manta Ray demonstrates a first-of-its-kind capability for an extra-large UUV due to its "cross-country modular transportation, in-field assembly, and subsequent deployment."
In April 2025, Anduril Industries announced their Copperhead (UUV) family of autonomous unmanned underwater vehicles, which includes a loitering munition.

Design
Gliders
External fins perpendicular to the frame of the UUV which allowed for a linear movement of the UUV and deeper, controlled dives. These gliders use buoyancy derived propulsion which increases the duration of dives and their range through up and down movement in the ocean.

Manta ray
In September 2021, researchers at a Chinese university developed a manta ray shaped UUV with the purpose of collecting information around the Paracel Islands. Some UUVs are designed to mimic the silhouettes of animals to facilitate movement and prevent detection. The manta ray design allows the UUV to camouflage with the marine life and contributes to the ease at which the craft swims through water.
In May 2024, Northrop Grumman revealed an underwater drone named the Manta Ray. The drone, built for DARPA, has been under development since 2020. The Manta Ray, along with the Orca developed by Boeing, represents a new class of uncrewed underwater vehicles (UUVs), that were developed to perform long duration, long range military missions with as little human oversight as possible. The Manta Ray is also capable of harvesting energy from the ocean.

Oxygen/hydrogen air-independent propulsion
UUVs with combustion engines are oxygen dependent vehicles which require to resurface. With the development of a propulsion unit that does not require oxygen or hydrogen, the ability for the UUV to stay continuously underwater increases drastically.

Lithium and water power source
The newest source of power for UUVs could be the free energy reaction of Lithium/water as it produces 8530 Wh/kg. 5% of this energy would surpass the already established sources of energy densities found in today's UUVs. The power source would essentially consume the water around the UUV and manipulated it to produce energy through chemical reactions  which would power the UUV.

Applications
Military
The US Navy began using UUVs in the 1990s to detect and disable underwater mines. UUVs were used by the US Navy during the Iraq War in the 2010s to remove mines around Umm Qasr, a port in southern Iraq.
The Chinese military uses UUVs for mostly data collection and reconnaissance purposes. In May 14, 2025 the NavalNews website published a candid photograph of a likely extra-large uncrewed underwater vehicle being transported under wraps with the speculation that it was the armed UUV-300 design which can host torpedoes, missiles, and mines. The British Royal Navy's Project Cetus vehicle and the Canadian's Cellula Robotics Solus-XR are of similar size.
On December 20, 2020, a fisherman in Indonesia spotted a glider-shaped UUV near Selayar Island in South Sulawesi. Individuals from the Indonesian military have categorized the vehicle to be a Chinese Sea Wing (Haiyi), created for the purposes of collecting data including water temperature, salinity, turbidity, and oxygen levels that can help chart optimal submarine routes.
The navies of multiple countries, including the US, UK, France, India, Russia, and China are currently creating uncrewed vehicles to be used in oceanic warfare to discover and terminate underwater mines. For instance, the REMUS is a three-foot long robot used to clear mines in one square mile within 16 hours. This is much more efficient, as a team of human divers would need upwards of 21 days to perform the same task.
A survey conducted by RAND Corporation for the US military analyzed the missions which uncrewed underwater vehicles could perform, which included intelligence, reconnaissance, mine countermeasures, and submarine warfare. The review listed these from most to least important.
In November 2022, the Eurasian Times reported that China's Harbin Engineering University has developed trans-medium 'flying submarine' drones capable of both underwater and air travel, noting the potential military applications of the vehicles.
During the Gaza war in 2023 Hamas used locally made UUV named "Al Asef" that can carry an explosive warhead of about 50 kilograms. These UUVs are deployed towards their targets, where they navigate independently and detonate upon reaching their objective ,Similar weapons which combine features of torpedoes and underwater drones, have been built by Iran and North Korea ,The Iranian ones are more professional,the North Korean Haeil family is much larger and heavily armed, possibly with the ability to carry a nuclear warhead.

Status-6 Oceanic Multipurpose System
Status-6 Oceanic Multipurpose System, nicknamed Poseidon, is a nuclear powered UUV developed by Russia that can carry a nuclear warhead.  According to Russian state media claims, it can allegedly travel at 50 knots and handle depths of over 3,000 feet.

Implementations
These examples of applications took place during the 2018 Advanced Naval Technology exercises, in August at the Naval Undersea Warfare Center Division Newport. The first example of uncrewed underwater vehicles was displayed by Northrop Grumman with their air drop sonobuoy's from a fire scout aircraft. Throughout the demonstration the company used the: e Iver3-580 (Northrop Grumman AUV) to display their vehicles ability to sweep for mines, while also displaying their real-time target automated recognition system. Another company, Huntington Ingalls Industries, presented their version of an uncrewed underwater vehicle named Proteus. The Proteus is a dual-mode undersea vehicle developed by Huntington and Battelle, the company during the presentation displayed their uncrewed underwater vehicle capabilities by conducting a full-kill demonstration on sea bed warfare. During the demonstration the vehicle utilized a synthetic aperture sonar which was attached to both the port and starboard of the craft, which allowed the uncrewed underwater vehicle to identify the targets placed underwater and to ultimately eliminate them. Ross Lindman (director of operations at the company's technical solution's fleet support group) stated that "The big significance of this is that we ran the full kill chain". "We ran a shortened version of an actual mission. We didn’t say, ‘Well we’re doing this part and you have to imagine this or that.’ We ran the whole thing to illustrate a capability that can be used in the near term." The final demonstration for anned underwater vehicles was displayed by General Dynamics, the company showcased their cross-domain multi-platform UUV through a theater simulating warfare planning tool. Through the utilization of this simulation, they showed a Littoral combat ship along with two uncrewed underwater vehicles. The goal of this exercise was to demonstrate the communication speed between the operator and the UUV. James Langevin, D-R.I., ranking member on the House Armed Services Committee’s subcommittee on emerging threats, stated in regard to this exercise "What this is all driving to is for the warfare commander to be able to make the decisions that are based on what he thinks is high-confidence input quicker than his adversary can," he said. "That’s the goal — we want to be able to … let them make warfare-related decisions quicker than anybody else out there." These exercises were conducted to showcase the applications of uncrewed underwater vehicles within the military community, along with the innovations each company created to better suite these specific mission types.

Film uses
UUVs were used for the National Geographic documentary "The Dark Secrets of the Lusitania", about the British ocean liner that the Germans sank during World War 1. The camera crew used submarines, ROUVs, and Newtsuits.
Argo, a UUV developed by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI), helped find the wreckage of the Titanic and film it both at wide and narrow angles. This footage was included in the 1986 National Geographic documentary "Secrets of the Titanic", which details an expedition led by Dr. Robber Ballard.

Deep-sea exploration and research
Uncrewed underwater vehicles can be used for deep-sea exploration and research. For example, remotely operated vehicles have been used to collect samples from the sea-floor to measure its microplastics-contents, to explore the deep-sea fauna and structures and discovering new underwater species.
UUVs are commonly used in oceanic research, for purposes such as current and temperature measurement, ocean floor mapping, and Hydrothermal vent detection. uncrewed underwater vehicles utilize seafloor mapping, bathymetry, digital cameras, magnetic sensors, and ultrasonic imaging.

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution employs a vehicle called the Sentry, which is designed to map the ocean floor at depths of six thousand meters. The vehicle is shaped to minimize water resistance during dives, and utilized acoustic communications systems to report the vehicles status while operating. uncrewed underwater vehicles are capable of recording conditions and terrain below sea ice, as the risk of sending an uncrewed vehicle into unstable ice formations is much lower than that of a manned vessel. Glider type uncrewed vehicles are often used to measure ocean temperatures and current strengths at various depths. Their simplicity and reduced operating costs allow more UUVs to be deployed with greater frequency, increasing the accuracy and detail of ocean weather reporting. Many UUVs designed with the purpose of collecting seafloor samples or images are of the towed type, being pulled by a ship's cable along either the seafloor or above. Towed vehicles may be selected for tasks which require large amounts of power and data transmission, such as sample testing and high definition imaging, as their tow cable serve as the method of communication between controller and craft. In 2021, scientists demonstrated a bioinspired self-powered soft robot for deep-sea operation that can withstand the pressure at the deepest part of the ocean at the Mariana Trench. The robot features artificial muscles and wings out of pliable materials and electronics distributed within its silicone body and could be used for exploration and environmental monitoring.
Science Direct claims the use of uncrewed Underwater Vehicles has risen consistently since they were introduced in the 1960s, and find their most frequent use in scientific research and data collection. Oceanservice describes Remote Operated Vehicles (ROVs) and Autonomous underwater vehicle (AUVs) as two variations of UUVs, each able to accomplish the same tasks, provided the craft is properly designed.

Ecosystem rehabilitation
Companies like Duro AUS offer UUVs that can remotely collect and transmit water data for local governments. Duro helps the New York City government collect data around Randall's Island Park Alliance to monitor water quality and wetland health in the East and Harlem Rivers. Another project that Duro is undertaking is in conjunction with the Bronx River Alliance to help rejuvenate the river's wildlife. Using this data, state and local governments have made key decisions regarding the policies under the New York Ocean Action Plan for adjacent oceans, rivers, and estuaries.

Concerns
A major concern with uncrewed underwater vehicles is communication. Communication between the pilot and uncrewed vehicle is crucial, however there are multiple factors that hinder the connection between the two. One of the major problems involves the distortion of transmissions underwater, because water can distort underwater transmissions and delay them which can be a very major problem in a time sensitive mission. Communications are usually disturbed due to the fact that uncrewed underwater vehicles utilize acoustic waves rather than the more conventional electromagnetic waves. Acoustic wave transmissions are typically delayed between 1–2 seconds, as they move more slowly than other types of waves. Other environmental conditions can also hinder communications such as reflection, refraction, and the absorbing of signal. These underwater phenomena overall scatter and degrade the signal, making UUV communication systems fairly delayed when compared to other communication sources. 
A popular navigation system aboard these uncrewed underwater vehicles is acoustic positioning, which is also faced with the same problems as acoustic communication because they use the same system. The Royal Netherlands Navy has published an article detailing their concerns surrounding uncrewed marine vehicles. The Royal Netherlands Navy is strongly concerned with the ability of UUV's to evade detection and complete tasks not possible in manned vessels. The adaptability and utility of uncrewed Underwater vehicles means it will be difficult to predict and counter their future actions.
Over the last few years, projects like TWINBOT are developing new ways of communication among several GIRONA500 AUVs.

See also
Radio-controlled submarine, operated via radio control
Remotely operated underwater vehicle, operated via cable

References
External links
Russia Says It's Working on a Drone That Can Imitate Any Submarine - The Surrogat - Saint Archived 2017-11-27 at the Wayback Machine
TWINBOT project
GIRONA500 Archived 2022-11-13 at the Wayback Machine

================================================================================

# ABB

ABB Group is a Swedish-Swiss multinational electrical engineering corporation. Incorporated in Switzerland as ABB Ltd, and headquartered in Zurich, it is dual-listed on the Nasdaq Nordic exchange in Stockholm, Sweden, and the SIX Swiss Exchange in Zurich. ABB was ranked 340th in the Fortune Global 500 list of 2020 and has been a global Fortune 500 company for 24 years.
ABB was formed in 1988, when Sweden's Allmänna Svenska Elektriska Aktiebolaget (ASEA) and Switzerland's Brown, Boveri & Cie merged to create Asea Brown Boveri, later simplified to the initials ABB. Both companies were established in the late 1800s and grew into major electrical equipment manufacturers, a business in which ABB remains active. Its traditional core activities include power generation, transmission and distribution; industrial automation, and robotics. Between 1989 and 1999, the company was also active in the rolling stock manufacturing sector. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, ABB acquired hundreds of other companies, often in central and eastern Europe, as well as in Asia and North America.
On occasion, the company's operations have encountered controversy. During 2001, an ABB entity pleaded guilty for bid rigging; the firm has also had three US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act bribing resolutions against it; in 2004, 2010, and 2022. In early 2002, ABB announced its first-ever annual loss, which was attributed to asbestos-related litigation. Within three years, the company had successfully restructured its operations. During the 2010s, ABB largely focused its growth strategy on the robotics and industrial automation sectors. Before the sale of its Power Grids division to Hitachi in 2020, ABB was Switzerland's largest industrial employer.

History
Predecessor companies and formation
Allmänna Svenska Elektriska Aktiebolaget (ASEA, English translation: General Swedish Electrical Company Limited) was founded in 1883 in Västerås, Sweden by Ludvig Fredholm as manufacturer of electrical light and generators. 
Brown, Boveri & Cie (BBC) was formed in 1891 in Baden near Zurich, Switzerland by Charles Eugene Lancelot Brown and Walter Boveri as a Swiss group of electrical engineering companies producing AC and DC motors, generators, steam turbines and transformers.
On 10 August 1987, ASEA and BBC announced they would merge to form ASEA Brown Boveri (ABB). The new corporation would remain headquartered in both Zurich, Switzerland and Västerås, Sweden, with each parent company holding 50 percent. The merger created a global industrial group with revenue of approximately $15 billion and 160,000 employees.
When ABB began operations on 5 January 1988, its core businesses included power generation, transmission and distribution; electric transportation; and industrial automation and robotics.
In its first year, ABB undertook some 15 acquisitions, including the environmental control group Fläkt AB of Sweden, the contracting group Sadelmi/Cogepi of Italy, and the railway manufacturer Scandia-Randers A/S of Denmark. In 1989, ABB purchased an additional 40 companies, including Westinghouse Electric's transmission and distribution assets, and announced an agreement to purchase the Stamford, Connecticut-based Combustion Engineering (C-E).

1990s
In 1990, ABB bought the robotics business of Cincinnati Milacron in the US. The acquisition expanded ABB's presence in automated spot-welding and positioned the company to better serve the American automotive industry. ABB's 1991 introduction of the IRB 6000 robot, demonstrated its increased capacity in this field. The first modular robot, the IRB 6000, can be reconfigured to perform a variety of specific tasks. At the time of its launch, the IRB 6000 was the fastest and most accurate spot-welding robot on the market.
In 1990, ABB also expanded into Australia when it acquired Commonwealth Engineering's (Comeng) plant in Dandenong, Melbourne. ABB continued to manufacture Comeng's B-class Melbourne tram at the plant. However, it did not continue manufacturing Comeng's Adelaide 3000 class railcar, which was manufactured by Clyde Engineering instead.
In the early 1990s, ABB started expanding in Central and Eastern Europe. By the end of 1991, the company employed 10,000 people in the region. The following year, that number doubled. A similar pattern played out in Asia, where economic reforms in China and the lifting of some economic sanctions, helped open the region to a new wave of outside investment and industrial growth. By 1994, ABB had 30,000 employees and 100 plants, engineering, service and marketing centers across Asia; numbers that would continue to grow. Through the 1990s, ABB continued its strategy of targeted expansion in Eastern Europe, the Asia–Pacific region and the Americas. 
During 1995, ABB agreed to merge its rail engineering unit with that of Daimler-Benz of Germany; the goal of this arrangement was to create the world's largest maker of locomotives and railway cars. The new company, ABB Daimler-Benz Transportation (Adtranz), had an initial global market share of nearly 12 percent. The merge took effect on 1 January 1996.
A few months following the start of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, ABB announced plans to accelerate its expansion in Asia as well as to improve the productivity and profitability of its Western operations. The firm took an $850 million restructuring charge and shed 10,000 jobs as the firm shifted more resources towards emerging markets and scaled back some of its facilities in higher-cost countries.
In June 1998, ABB announced that it would acquire Sweden-based Alfa Laval's automation unit, which at the time was one of Europe's top suppliers of process control systems and automation equipment.
During 1999, as a final step in the integration of the companies formerly known as ASEA and BBC, the directors unanimously approved a plan to create a unified, single class of shares in the group.
That same year, ABB completed its purchase of Elsag Bailey Process Automation, a Netherlands-based maker of industrial control systems, in exchange for $2.1 billion. The acquisition increased ABB's presence in the high-tech industrial robotics and factory control system sectors, which reducing its reliance on traditional heavy engineering sectors such as power generation and transmission.
In 1999, the company sold its stake in the Adtranz train-building business to DaimlerChrysler. Instead of building complete locomotives, ABB's transportation activities shifted increasingly toward traction motors and electric components. That same year, ABB and France-based Alstom, announced the merger of their power generation businesses in a 50-50 joint company, ABB Alstom Power. Separately, in December 1999, ABB agreed to sell its nuclear power business to British Nuclear Fuels of the United Kingdom.

2000s
During 2000, ABB divested its interests in ABB Alstom Power and sold its boiler and fossil-fuel operations (including Gas turbines) to Alstom. Thereafter, ABB's power business was focused on renewable energy and transmission and distribution.
In early 2002, ABB announced its first-ever annual loss, a $691 million net loss for 2001. The loss was caused by ABB's decision to nearly double its provisions for settlement costs in asbestos-related litigation against its American subsidiary Combustion Engineering from $470 million to $940 million; these claims were linked to asbestos products sold by Combustion Engineering prior to its acquisition by ABB. At the same time, ABB's board announced it would seek the return of money "paid in excess of obligations to Goran Lindahl and to Percy Barnevik," two former chief executive officers of the group. Barnevik received some $89 million in pension benefits when he left ABB in 2001; Lindahl, who succeeded Barnevik as CEO, had received $50 million in pension benefits.
In 2004, ABB sold its upstream oil and gas business, ABB Vetco Gray, to a consortium of private equity investors for an initial sum of $925 million; despite the sale, ABB continued to play an active role in the oil and gas industry via its core automation and power technology businesses.
During 2005, ABB delisted its shares from the London Stock Exchange and Frankfurt Stock Exchange. During the following year, the company ended its financial uncertainties via the finalization of a $1.43 billion plan to settle asbestos liabilities against its US subsidiaries, Combustion Engineering and ABB Lummus Global, Inc. A three-part capital strengthening plan also aided in ABB's recovery.
In August 2007, ABB Lummus Global, ABB's downstream oil and gas business, was sold to CB&I in exchange for $950 million. The sale led to ABB making an accelerated $204 million payment to the CE Asbestos PI Trust, a trust fund covering the asbestos liabilities of Combustion Engineering.
During 2008, ABB agreed to acquire Kuhlman Electric Corporation, a US-based maker of transformers for the industrial and electric utility sectors. In November 2008, ABB acquired Ber-Mac Electrical and Instrumentation to expand its presence in Western Canada's oil and gas industries.

2010s
In September 2010, the company bought K-TEK, a manufacturer of level measurement instruments, for $50 million; it was incorporated into ABB's Measurement Products business unit within ABB's Process Automation division.
During July 2010, ABB in Cary, North Carolina received a $4.2 million grant from the US federal government to develop energy storing magnets.
On 10 January 2011, ABB invested $10 million in ECOtality, a San Francisco-based developer of charging stations and power storage technologies, to enter North America's electric vehicle charging market. On 1 July of that year, the company announced its acquisition of Epyon B.V. of the Netherlands, an early leader in the European EV-charging infrastructure and maintenance markets.
During early 2011, ABB acquired Baldor Electric in exchange for $4.2 billion in an all-cash transaction; this move aligned with ABB's strategy to increase its market share in the North American industrial motors business. On 30 January 2012, the company announced the acquisition of Thomas & Betts, a North American specialist in low voltage products for industrial, construction and utility applications, in a $3.9 billion cash transaction. On 15 June 2012, ABB completed its acquisition of commercial and industrial wireless technology specialists Tropos.
In July 2013, ABB acquired Power-One in a $1 billion all-cash transaction, to become the leading global manufacturer of solar inverters. That same year, Fastned selected ABB to supply more than 200 Terra fast-charging stations along highways in the Netherlands.
In 2016, ABB was awarded a contract on the TANAP gas pipeline project in Turkey to deliver the telecommunications, security and control infrastructure to contribute to safe, secure, and reliable operation of the pipeline throughout its lifetime. The TANAP pipeline is the largest diameter and with 1,850 km length, the longest pipeline ever built in Turkey, crossing 20 districts and will bring Azerbaijan's natural gas through Georgia, Turkey and Greece into the rest of Europe. The $11 billion TANAP pipeline will interconnect with the South Caucasus Pipeline (SCP) at Turkey's border with Georgia and the Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP) at its border with Greece.
On 6 July 2017, ABB announced it had completed its acquisition of Bernecker + Rainer Industrie-Elektronik (B&R), the largest independent provider of product and software-based open-architecture for industrial automation.

During January 2018, ABB became the title partner of the ABB FIA Formula E Championship, the world's first fully electric international FIA motorsport series. On 30 June 2018, the company completed its acquisition of GE Industrial Solutions, General Electric's global electrification business.
On 17 December 2018, ABB announced it had agreed to sell 80.1% of its Power Grids business to Hitachi; the former Power Grids division thus became a part of the Hitachi Group and was rebranded to Hitachi Energy. During December 2022, it was confirmed that Hitachi had acquired the remaining 19.9% of the business.

2020s
In March 2020, ABB announced that it had agreed to sell its solar inverter business to Italian solar inverter manufacturer Fimer; the transaction includes all of ABB's manufacturing and R&D sites in Finland, Italy and India, along with 800 employees across 26 countries.
During mid-2021, ABB announced its involvement in the construction of the first permanent electric road that powers private vehicles and commercial vehicles such as trucks and buses.
During December 2022, ABB opened a new 67,000 square metre robotics factory in Shanghai following a $150 million investment.
In June 2023, ABB agreed to acquire smart home automation provider Eve Systems.
In September 2023, ABB announced it would partner with the Well Done Foundation to monitor methane and greenhouse gas emissions from orphaned wells in the United States.
In January 2024, ABB acquired Real Tech, a prominent Canadian company specializing in innovative optical sensor technology for real-time water monitoring and testing. It also acquired R&D Engineering Firm Meshmind to Expand AI and Software Capabilities
In May 2024, ABB agreed to acquire the wiring accessories business of Siemens in China. This deal will give access to a distribution network across 230 cities in China.
As of 2025, ABB planned to rebrand all of its residential electrical product lines acquired from GE with the ABB ReliaHome brand.

Products and services
Major product launches and innovations
In 1990, ABB launched Azipod, a family of electric propulsion systems that extends below the hulls of large ships, providing both thrust and steering functions. Developed in cooperation with the Finnish shipbuilder Masa-Yards, Azipod has demonstrated the viability of hybrid-electric power in seagoing vessels, while also increasing maneuverability, fuel efficiency and space efficiency.
In 1998, ABB launched the FlexPicker, a robot using a three-armed delta design uniquely suited to the picking and packing industry.
In 2000, ABB brought to market the world's first commercial high-voltage shore-to-ship electric power, at the Swedish port of Gothenburg. Supplying electricity to berthed ships from the shore enables vessels to shut down their engines while in port, significantly reducing noise, vibrations and carbon emissions.
In 2004, ABB launched its Extended Automation System 800xA, an industrial system for the process industries. Today, the company is the global market leader in distributed control systems.

In May 2013, ABB Sécheron SA joined with several groups in Geneva TOSA (Trolleybus Optimisation Système Alimentation, or in English, Trolleybus Power System Optimization) in a one-year demonstration of a trolleybus route using a novel charging system. Rather than overhead wires, charging is accomplished by fixed overhead devices located at stops along the route and at the terminus. Jean-Luc Favre, head of Rail ISI, discussed the promising role of improved electric transport technology in ABB.
In 2014, ABB unveiled YuMi, a collaborative industrial dual-arm assembly robot that permits people and machines to work side by side, unlocking new potential for automation in a range of industries.
In 2018, ABB unveiled the Terra High Power charger for electric vehicles, capable of delivering enough to charge in eight minutes to enable an electric car to travel 200 kilometers.

Electrification
ABB's Electrification business area offers products and services from substation to socket. Customers include a wide range of industry and utility operations, plus commercial and residential buildings. The business has strong exposure to a range of rapidly growing segments, including renewables, e-mobility, data centers and smart buildings.
Its offerings include electric vehicle chargers, modular substations, distribution automation; products to protect people, installations and electronic equipment from overcurrents such as enclosures, cable systems and low-voltage circuit breakers; measuring and sensing devices, control products, switches and wiring accessories.
The business also offers KNX systems that integrate and automate a building's electrical installations, ventilation systems, and security and data communication networks. Electrification incorporates an "Electrification Solutions" unit manufacturing low voltage switchgear and motor control centers.
The acquisition of GE Industrial Solutions, which was completed in June 2018, further strengthened ABB's #2 global position in electrification.

Motion
ABB's Motion business area provides a range of electrical motors, generators, drives and services, as well as integrated digital powertrain solutions. Motion is the #1 player in the market globally. In September 2023, it was announced ABB Motion had acquired a minority stake in the Burlington-headquartered wind turbine analytics software company, WindESCo.

Robotics and discrete automation
ABB's Robotics & Discrete Automation business area combines machine and factory automation systems, mainly from B&R, which ABB acquired in 2017, with a comprehensive robotics concepts and applications suite.
ABB has installed over 300,000 robots globally. The Robotics & Discrete Automation business has been positioned to capture the opportunities associated with the "factory of the future" by providing services for flexible manufacturing and smart machinery.
The business is #2 globally, with a #1 position in robotics in the high-growth Chinese market, where ABB is expanding its innovation and production capacity by investing in a new robotics factory in Shanghai.

Process automation
The Process Automation business area provides a range of services for process and hybrid industries, including its industry-specific integrated automation, electrification and digital services, control technologies, software and advanced services, as well as measurement & analytics, marine and turbocharging offerings.

Former divisions
Power Grids
The Power Grids business area offered components for the transmission and distribution of electricity, and incorporated ABB's manufacturing network for transformers, switchgear, circuit breakers, and associated high voltage equipment such as digital protective relays. It also offered maintenance services.
A key part of Power Grids' offering were turnkey systems and service for power transmission and distribution grids and for power plants; this included electrical substations and substation automation systems, flexible AC transmission systems (FACTS), high-voltage direct current (HVDC) systems, and network management systems. The division was subdivided into the four business units High Voltage Products, Transformers, Grid Automation and Grid Integration.
In 2010, ABB's North American headquarters in Cary, North Carolina, announced a new partnership with Sensus of Raleigh, North Carolina, to develop technologies to work together on smart grids.
During 2014, ABB formed a joint venture with Hitachi to provide HVDC system solutions in Japan.
In December 2018, ABB and Hitachi announced that the latter would take over ABB's entire Power Grids division in exchange for roughly $6.4 billion. Hitachi officially acquired 80.1% of the business in July 2020. Initially known as Hitachi ABB Power Grids, the new Hitachi subsidiary was rebranded as Hitachi Energy in October 2021. The transaction was one of Hitachi's biggest-ever deals, as it shifted focus to a higher-growth market for electricity networks. Hitachi acquired the remainder of the company from ABB in 2022.
In July 2021, ABB confirmed the sale of its mechanical power transmission business, Dodge, to American company RBC Bearings Incorporated for $2.9bn.

Rolling stock manufacturing
ABB Group entered the heavy rail rolling stock manufacturing market in 1989 through a 40% shareholding in a consortium, headed with Trafalgar House and some former British Rail employees, that purchased British Rail Engineering Limited (BREL), the formerly state-owned manufacturing arm of British Rail. BREL was the first division of British Rail to be privatised as part of a phased plan initiated by the third Thatcher ministry. ABB took over two rolling stock manufacturing facilities from BREL; the Derby Litchurch Lane Works and York Carriage Works. Additionally, ABB took over Crewe Works in a purely maintenance capacity. During September 1992, ABB Group purchased the stakes of the other members of the consortium to become the sole owner with the business rebranded ABB Transportation.
The first trains produced at either facility under ABB ownership were for an order for 22 three-carriage Class 320 electric multiple units, built at ABB York for Glasgow's suburban railways in 1990. That same year, ABB York finished an order for five similar four-car Class 322 units for the new Stansted Express service. Between 1990 and 1991, ABB York built 24 two-car Class 456 third rail trains for Network SouthEast services out of London Waterloo. A further order for 97 four-car Class 465 units was completed at ABB York for Network SouthEast services in and around Kent between 1991 and 1994. Numerous diesel multiple units were also built at ABB York, including 76 Class 165 suburban units for Chiltern Main Line and Great Western Main Line commuter services between 1990 and 1992, followed by 21 Class 166 three-car express units for longer-distance services out of London Paddington.
After initially focusing its resources on rolling stock refurbishment, the first new trains to roll off the production line at ABB Derby were the ten two-car Class 482 trains, built for the Waterloo & City line while it was still under the control of Network SouthEast (since transferred to the London Underground). In 1995, ABB Derby built 16 four-car Class 325 electric freight multiple units for the Royal Mail to replace their ageing fleet of parcels carriages. During the mid-1990s, in a bid to expand their international portfolio, both the Derby and York plants completed a number of ABB Eurotram light rail vehicles for the Strasbourg tramway in France. Around the same time, in a further diversification, ABB partnered with Brush Traction to construct the fleet of 46 Class 92 electric locomotives for hauling freight trains through the Channel Tunnel; ABB were involved in the design and construction of many components including the traction motors, while final assembly took place at Brush Works in Loughborough.
The last trains to roll off the production line at ABB York were an order for 41 four-carriage Class 365 electric multiple units for Connex South Eastern and West Anglia Great Northern services between 1994 and 1995. Following the privatisation of British Rail, ABB encountered a decline in train orders, largely due to increased competition from competing manufacturers and no longer having a monopoly on rolling stock production in the British market. Thus the business was rationalised; ABB York was closed in 1996 (it would later be reopened as a rail wagon manufacturing centre by the Thrall Car Manufacturing Company) and all manufacturing activity was relocated to ABB Derby, the operation of which was transferred to the Adtranz joint venture between ABB and DaimlerChrysler in 1996.
During 1997, Adtranz unveiled the Class 168 train for Chiltern Railways. The design of the Class 168 would subsequently be further developed into the Turbostar and Electrostar families of trains, which in turn became the most successful rolling stock design on post-privatisation British railways by number of units sold. During 1999, ABB sold its 50% stake in Adtranz to Daimler for $472 million, thus exiting the rolling stock manufacturing sector. Shortly thereafter, Daimler sold the Adtranz unit to Bombardier Transportation.

Legacy brands
Bailey Controls
Founded in 1916 by Ervin G. Bailey, Bailey Controls developed the world's first steam boiler meter before becoming an industry leader in control and instrumentation of automated processes. In 1989 the company merged with the Italian Elsag Group which also produced automation control and instrumentation devices. Elsag Bailey Process Automation would be acquired by ABB in 1999.

Fischer & Porter
The Fischer & Porter Company was founded in 1937 being an industry leader in process instrumentation producing an industry-leading range of flow measurement products, along with devices to measure, indicate, and control other process variables including pressure (most famously the Fisher-Porter tube), temperature, level, and more. In 1994 Fischer & Porter was acquired by Elsag Bailey Process Automation, which in turn was acquired by ABB in 1999.

Management
During September 2013, Ulrich Spiesshofer was named ABB's CEO, succeeding Joe Hogan.
In August 2019, ABB announced industrial veteran Björn Rosengren would take over as CEO starting March 2020. Rosengren was then serving as CEO of Swedish mining-equipment giant Sandvik. In the meantime, ABB Chairman Peter Voser was appointed interim CEO on 17 April 2019, succeeding Ulrich Spiesshofer, who stepped down after five-and-a-half years. Voser was elected chairman of the board of directors in April 2015 and succeeded Hubertus von Grünberg, who had been chairman since May 2007. Jürgen Dormann was chairman from 2002 to 2007, and Percy Barnevik from 1999 to 2002.

Ownership
The largest single stake in the firm is held by the Swedish investment company Investor AB, controlled by the Wallenberg family, which holds 12.9%. Activist investor Cevian also holds a large stake in the company.

Controversy and litigation
In December 2022, ABB was charged by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) in a bribery scheme in South Africa. It was ordered to pay a total of $460 million to U.S. authorities to settle criminal and civil charges. ABB paid more than $37 million in bribes to a high-ranking Eskom official to influence contracts awarded by the state-owned electric utility company for work on the Kusile Power Station project between 2014 and 2017. The official had influence over the awarding of contracts for power projects in the country. In exchange for the bribes, ABB secured a $160 million contract to provide services related to cabling and installation work at Eskom's Kusile Power Station, one of the largest coal-fired power plants in the world.
In a parallel case, the DOJ fined ABB $315 million to settle criminal charges. ABB had to pay $75 million in civil penalties to settle the SEC's charges. It was fined 4 million Francs by Swiss authorities. ABB also agreed to repay $104 million to Eskom it was paid in connection with Kusile.
In January 2024, the United States House Committee on Homeland Security and the United States House Select Committee on Strategic Competition between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party announced an investigation into ABB regarding equipment sold to Chinese state-owned crane manufacturer ZPMC.

See also
GREEN Cell Shipping
Legrand
Strömberg

References
Further reading
ABB (2005): The Dormann Letters, Jürgen Dormann/ABB Group, Zurich.
Bélanger, Jacques et al. (2001): Being local worldwide: ABB and the challenge of global management, Cornell University Press, New York. ISBN 0-8014-3650-8.
Kevin Barham, Claudia Heimer (1998): ABB: the dancing giant – creating the globally connected corporation. Financial Times, London. ISBN 0-273-62861-5.

External links

Official website

Business data for ABB: 
Documents and clippings about ABB in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW

================================================================================

# Acoustic wave

Acoustic waves are types of waves that propagate through matter—such as gas, liquid, and/or solids—by causing the particles of the medium to compress and expand. These waves carry energy and are characterized by properties like acoustic pressure, particle velocity, and acoustic intensity. The speed of an acoustic wave depends on the properties of the medium it travels through; for example, it travels at approximately 343 meters per second in air, and 1480 meters per second in water. Acoustic waves encompass a broad range of phenomena, from audible sound to seismic waves and ultrasound, finding applications in diverse fields like acoustics, engineering, and medicine.

Wave properties
An acoustic wave is a mechanical wave that transmits energy through the movements of atoms and molecules. Acoustic waves transmit through fluids in a longitudinal manner (movement of particles are parallel to the direction of propagation of the wave); in contrast to electromagnetic waves that transmit in transverse manner (movement of particles at a right angle to the direction of propagation of the wave). However, in solids, acoustic waves transmit in both longitudinal and transverse manners due to presence of shear moduli in such a state of matter.

Acoustic wave equation
The acoustic wave equation describes the propagation of sound waves. The acoustic wave equation for sound pressure in one dimension is given by

                ∂

                  2

              p

              ∂

                x

                  2

        −

            1

              c

                2

                ∂

                  2

              p

              ∂

                t

                  2

        =
        0

    {\displaystyle {\partial ^{2}p \over \partial x^{2}}-{1 \over c^{2}}{\partial ^{2}p \over \partial t^{2}}=0}

where

        p

    {\displaystyle p}

 is sound pressure in Pa

        x

    {\displaystyle x}

 is position in the direction of propagation of the wave, in m

        c

    {\displaystyle c}

 is speed of sound in m/s

        t

    {\displaystyle t}

 is time in s
The wave equation for particle velocity has the same shape and is given by

                ∂

                  2

              u

              ∂

                x

                  2

        −

            1

              c

                2

                ∂

                  2

              u

              ∂

                t

                  2

        =
        0

    {\displaystyle {\partial ^{2}u \over \partial x^{2}}-{1 \over c^{2}}{\partial ^{2}u \over \partial t^{2}}=0}

where

        u

    {\displaystyle u}

 is particle velocity in m/s
For lossy media, more intricate models need to be applied in order to take into account frequency-dependent attenuation and phase speed. Such models include acoustic wave equations that incorporate fractional derivative terms, see also the acoustic attenuation article.
D'Alembert gave the general solution for the lossless wave equation. For sound pressure, a solution would be

        p
        =
        R
        cos
        ⁡
        (
        ω
        t
        −
        k
        x
        )
        +
        (
        1
        −
        R
        )
        cos
        ⁡
        (
        ω
        t
        +
        k
        x
        )

    {\displaystyle p=R\cos(\omega t-kx)+(1-R)\cos(\omega t+kx)}

where

        ω

    {\displaystyle \omega }

 is angular frequency in rad/s

        t

    {\displaystyle t}

 is time in s

        k

    {\displaystyle k}

 is wave number in rad·m−1

        R

    {\displaystyle R}

 is a coefficient without unit
For 

        R
        =
        1

    {\displaystyle R=1}

 the wave becomes a travelling wave moving rightwards, for 

        R
        =
        0

    {\displaystyle R=0}

 the wave becomes a travelling wave moving leftwards. A standing wave can be obtained  by 

        R
        =
        0.5

    {\displaystyle R=0.5}

.

Phase
In a travelling wave pressure and particle velocity are in phase, which means the phase angle between the two quantities is zero.
This can be easily proven using the ideal gas law

        p
        V
        =
        n
        R
        T

    {\displaystyle pV=nRT}

where

        p

    {\displaystyle p}

 is pressure in Pa

        V

    {\displaystyle V}

 is volume in m3

        n

    {\displaystyle n}

 is amount in mol

        R

    {\displaystyle R}

 is the universal gas constant with value 

        8.314

        472
        (
        15
        )

              J

              m
              o
              l

              K

    {\textstyle 8.314\,472(15)~{\frac {\mathrm {J} }{\mathrm {mol~K} }}}

Consider a volume 

        V

    {\displaystyle V}

. As an acoustic wave propagates through the volume, adiabatic compression and decompression occurs. For adiabatic change the following relation between volume 

        V

    {\displaystyle V}

 of a parcel of fluid and pressure 

        p

    {\displaystyle p}

 holds

              ∂
              V

              V

                m

        =

              −
              1

              γ

              ∂
              p

              p

                m

    {\displaystyle {\partial V \over V_{m}}={-1 \over \ \gamma }{\partial p \over p_{m}}}

where 

        γ

    {\displaystyle \gamma }

 is the adiabatic index without unit and the subscript 

        m

    {\displaystyle m}

 denotes the mean value of the respective variable.
As a sound wave propagates through a volume, the horizontal displacement of a particle 

        η

    {\displaystyle \eta }

 occurs along the wave propagation direction.

              ∂
              η

              V

                m

        A
        =

              ∂
              V

              V

                m

        =

              −
              1

              γ

              ∂
              p

              p

                m

    {\displaystyle {\partial \eta  \over V_{m}}A={\partial V \over V_{m}}={-1 \over \ \gamma }{\partial p \over p_{m}}}

where

        A

    {\displaystyle A}

 is cross-sectional area in m2
From this equation it can be seen that when pressure is at its maximum, particle displacement from average position reaches zero. As mentioned before, the oscillating pressure for a rightward traveling wave can be given by

        p
        =

          p

            0

        cos
        ⁡
        (
        ω
        t
        −
        k
        x
        )

    {\displaystyle p=p_{0}\cos(\omega t-kx)}

Since displacement is maximum when pressure is zero there is a 90 degrees phase difference, so displacement is given by 

        η
        =

          η

            0

        sin
        ⁡
        (
        ω
        t
        −
        k
        x
        )

    {\displaystyle \eta =\eta _{0}\sin(\omega t-kx)}

Particle velocity is the first derivative of particle displacement: 

        u
        =
        ∂
        η

          /

        ∂
        t

    {\displaystyle u=\partial \eta /\partial t}

. Differentiation of a sine gives a cosine again

        u
        =

          u

            0

        cos
        ⁡
        (
        ω
        t
        −
        k
        x
        )

    {\displaystyle u=u_{0}\cos(\omega t-kx)}

During adiabatic change, temperature changes with pressure as well following

              ∂
              T

              T

                m

        =

              γ
              −
              1

              γ

              ∂
              p

              p

                m

    {\displaystyle {\partial T \over T_{m}}={\gamma -1 \over \ \gamma }{\partial p \over p_{m}}}

This fact is exploited within the field of thermoacoustics.

Propagation speed
The propagation speed, or acoustic velocity, of acoustic waves is a function of the medium of propagation. In general, the acoustic velocity c is given by the Newton-Laplace equation:

        c
        =

              C
              ρ

    {\displaystyle c={\sqrt {\frac {C}{\rho }}}}

where

C is a coefficient of stiffness, the bulk modulus (or the modulus of bulk elasticity for gas mediums),

        ρ

    {\displaystyle \rho }

 is the density in kg/m3
Thus the acoustic velocity increases with the stiffness (the resistance of an elastic body to deformation by an applied force) of the material, and decreases with the density.
For general equations of state, if classical mechanics is used, the acoustic velocity 

        c

    {\displaystyle c}

 is given by

          c

            2

        =

              ∂
              p

              ∂
              ρ

    {\displaystyle c^{2}={\frac {\partial p}{\partial \rho }}}

with 

        p

    {\displaystyle p}

 as the pressure and 

        ρ

    {\displaystyle \rho }

 the density, where differentiation is taken with respect to adiabatic change.

Phenomena
Acoustic waves are elastic waves that exhibit phenomena like diffraction, reflection and interference. Note that sound waves in air are not polarized since they oscillate along the same direction as they move.

Interference
Interference is the addition of two or more waves that results in a new wave pattern. Interference of sound waves can be observed when two loudspeakers transmit the same signal. At certain locations constructive interference occurs, doubling the local sound pressure. And at other locations destructive interference occurs, causing a local sound pressure of zero pascals.

Standing wave
A standing wave is a special kind of wave that can occur in a resonator. In a resonator superposition of the incident and reflective wave occurs, causing a standing wave. Pressure and particle velocity are 90 degrees out of phase in a standing wave.
Consider a tube with two closed ends acting as a resonator. The resonator has normal modes at frequencies given by

        f
        =

              N
              c

              2
              d

        N
        ∈
        {
        1
        ,
        2
        ,
        3
        ,
        …
        }

    {\displaystyle f={\frac {Nc}{2d}}\qquad \qquad N\in \{1,2,3,\dots \}}

where

        c

    {\displaystyle c}

 is the speed of sound in m/s

        d

    {\displaystyle d}

 is the length of the tube in m
At the ends particle velocity becomes zero since there can be no particle displacement. Pressure however doubles at the ends because of interference of the incident wave with the reflective wave. As pressure is maximum at the ends while velocity is zero, there is a 90 degrees phase difference between them.

Reflection
An acoustic travelling wave can be reflected by a solid surface. If a travelling wave is reflected, the reflected wave can interfere with the incident wave causing a standing wave in the near field. As a consequence, the local pressure in the near field is doubled, and the particle velocity becomes zero.
Attenuation causes the reflected wave to decrease in power as distance from the reflective material increases. As the power of the reflective wave decreases compared to the power of the incident wave, interference also decreases. And as interference decreases, so does the phase difference between sound pressure and particle velocity. At a large enough distance from the reflective material, there is no interference left anymore. At this distance one can speak of the far field.
The amount of reflection is given by the reflection coefficient which is the ratio of the reflected intensity over the incident intensity

        R
        =

              p

                reflected

              p

                incident

    {\displaystyle R={\frac {p_{\text{reflected}}}{p_{\text{incident}}}}}

Absorption
Acoustic waves can be absorbed. The amount of absorption is given by the absorption coefficient which is given by

        α
        =
        1
        −

          R

            2

    {\displaystyle \alpha =1-R^{2}}

where

        α

    {\displaystyle \alpha }

 is the absorption coefficient without a unit

        R

    {\displaystyle R}

 is the reflection coefficient without a unit
Often acoustic absorption of materials is given in decibels instead.

Layered media
When an acoustic wave propagates through a non-homogeneous medium, it will undergo diffraction at the impurities it encounters or at the interfaces between layers of different materials. This is a phenomenon very similar to that of the refraction, absorption and transmission of light in Bragg mirrors. The concept of acoustic wave propagation through periodic media is exploited with great success in acoustic metamaterial engineering. 
The acoustic absorption, reflection and transmission in multilayer materials can be calculated with the transfer-matrix method.

See also

== References ==

================================================================================

# Adaptable robotics

Adaptable Robotics refers to a field of robotics with a focus on creating robotic systems capable of adjusting their hardware and software components to perform a wide range of tasks while adapting to varying environments. The 1960s introduced robotics into the industrial field. Since then, the need to make robots with new forms of actuation, adaptability, sensing and perception, and even the ability to learn stemmed the field of adaptable robotics. Significant developments such as the PUMA robot, manipulation research, soft robotics, swarm robotics, AI, cobots, bio-inspired approaches, and more ongoing research have advanced the adaptable robotics field tremendously. Adaptable robots are usually associated with their development kit, typically used to create autonomous mobile robots. In some cases, an adaptable kit will still be functional even when certain components break.
Adaptable robotics systems successfully adapt to their environment using techniques such as modular design, machine learning, and sensor feedback. Using this, they have revolutionized various industries and can address many real-world challenges in the medical, industrial, extraterrestrial, and experimental fields. There are still many challenges to overcome in adaptable robotics, which presents opportunities for growth in the field.

Fundamental concepts
An adaptable robot typically has attributes that distinguish it from robots that perform their task regardless of external factors. Four concepts that adaptable robots utilize to make this distinction are adaptability, sensing and perception, learning and intelligence, and actuation.

Adaptability
A robot can be defined as adaptive when it has capabilities such as intrinsic safety and performance without compromise, the ability to learn, and the capacity to perform tasks traditional robots are not capable of. These capabilities can be achieved through force control technology, hierarchical intelligence, and other innovative approaches. John Adler’s invention in 1994, the cyberknife, is a robotic surgery system that is capable of using ultra-fine precision in medical procedures which demonstrates such adaptations.

Sensing and Perception
Environmental information gathered through peripherals is processed intelligently in adaptable systems. AI systems can process this data and adjust task primitives accordingly, leading to adapted action. In 2001, the Canadarm 2 was launched to the ISS and played a key role in the maintenance of the station, using data from peripherals to adapt the ISS to environmental changes within it.

Learning and Intelligence
AI, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning allow systems to learn about the world around them and become progressively more intelligent when executing their tasks. In 1997 the robot Sojourner was launched to Mars, with an onboard computer allowing it to adapt to unplanned events and obstacles even with minimal data; a precursor to the addition of AI in adaptable systems. Later that year, IBM’s Deep Blue computer defeated Garry Kasparov in a game of chess, a landmark for robotic AI’s ability to plan and react.

Actuation
Actuation in robotic systems allows the robot to move. Adaptable actuators typically function in response to environmental changes, such as changes in temperature which may change the shape of the actuator. Thus, altering functionality. Self-powering (untethered) actuation is achievable, especially in soft robotics where external stimuli can change the shape of an actuator, creating mechanical energy. In 1989 Rodney Brooks created Ghengis, a hexapedal robot capable of traversing difficult terrain. The Hexapedal model uses six actuators for mobility and has remained prominent with modern hexapedal models like the Rhex.

Software
The kits come with an open software platform tailored to a range of common robotic functions. The kits also come with common robotics hardware that connects easily with the software (infrared sensors, motors, microphone and video camera), which add to the capabilities of the robot. 
The process of modifying a robot to achieve varying capabilities such as collaboration could merely include the selection of a module, the exchange of modules, robotic instruction via software, and execution.

Types
Soft Robots
Robotics with soft grippers is an emerging field in the adaptable robotic scene which is based on the Venus flytrap. Two soft robotic surfaces provide enveloping and pinching grasp modules. This technology is tested in a variety of environments to determine the effects of diverse objects, errors of object position, and soft robotic surface installation on grasping capacity. Untethered actuation is achievable, especially in soft robots with liquid crystal polymers, a category of stimuli-responsive materials with two way shape memory effect. This can allow the liquid crystal polymers to generate mechanical energy by changing shape in response to external stimuli, hence untethered actuation.

Modular Robots
Robots designed for the outdoors that adapt to changing landscapes and obstacles. These are constructed like a chain of individual modules with simple hinge joints, enabling modular robots to morph themselves into various shapes to traverse terrain. Some of these forms include configurations like spider, serpentine, and loop.

Swarm Robotics
Field of robotics utilizing swarm intelligence to groups of simple homogeneous robots. Swarm robots follow algorithms, usually designed to mimic the behavior of real animals, in order to determine their movements in response to environmental stimuli.

Biohybrid Robots
Biohybrid robotics use living tissues or cells to provide machines with functions that would be difficult to achieve otherwise. For instance, muscle cells have been utilized to allow certain biohybrid robots to move. Swarm robotics combine with biohybrid in certain cases, especially within the medical field  Insect-machine hybrid robots, also known as cyborg insects or insect biobots, is the fusion of a living insect and artificial control system integrated with its body to drive its locomotion or behaviours.

Applications
Adaptable robotics possess capabilities that have made them applicable to many fields including, but not limited to, the medical, industrial, and experimental fields.
Learning from demonstration is a strategy for transferring human motion skills to robots. The primary goal is to identify significant movement primitives, significant movements humans make, from demonstration and remake these motions to adapt the robot to that motion. There have been a few issues with robots being unable to adapt skills learned by learning from demonstration to new environments (a change from the scenario in which the robot was given initial demonstrations). These issues with learning from demonstration have been addressed with a learning model based on a nonlinear dynamic system which encodes trajectories as dynamic motion primitive, which are similar to movement primitives, but they are significant movements represented by a mathematical equation; equation variables change with the changing environment, altering the motion performed. The trajectories recorded through these systems have proven to apply to a wide variety of environments making the robots more effective in their respective spheres. Learning from demonstration has progressed the applicability of robotics in fields where precision is essential, such as surgical environments.
In the medical field, SAR technology focuses on taking sensory data from wearable peripherals to perceive the user’s state of being. The information gathered enables the machine to provide personalized monitoring, motivation, and coaching for rehabilitation. Intuitive Physical HRI and interfaces between humans and robots allow functionalities like recording the motions of a surgeon to infer their intent, determining the mechanical parameters of human tissue, and other sensory data to use in medical scenarios. Biohybrid robotics have medical applications utilizing biodegradable components to allow robots to function safely within the human body.
AI, machine learning, and deep learning have allowed advances in adaptable robotics such as autonomous navigation, object recognition and manipulation, natural language processing, and predictive maintenance. These technologies have been essential in the development of cobots (collaborative robots), which are robots capable of working alongside humans capable of adapting to changing environments.
In the industrial field, AI, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning can be used to perform quality control checks on manufactured products, identify defects in products, and alert production teams to make necessary changes in real-time.

Challenges and limitations
Systems that involve physical collaboration between humans and robots are difficult to design well due to human uncertainty. Humans alter the force of their motions regularly due to human factors like emotion, biological processes, and other extraneous factors unknown to a robot. This can make sensory data difficult to quantify for successful adaptation in robots. Furthermore, the specific needs, characteristics, and preferences that a patient in a medical scenario may need vary from person to person. Adaptable robotic systems need extended time to adapt to the new environment introduced from patient to patient.
The need for reliable data from sensory technology is a challenge for adaptable systems, especially in the AI realm. With AI models becoming rapidly more advanced, the need to develop peripheral technologies able to provide necessary information for these systems becomes increasingly more challenging. Furthermore, the need for dynamic environments to train AI algorithms proves to be challenging as not every scenario a machine may find itself in will be introduced to it during training.
Swarm robots are limited by interference and collisions, uncertainty, lack of specialization, and lack of understanding of the behavioral pattern of the swarm. Biohybrid robotics have challenges with living cells being delicate even though they are adaptable to a variety of environments due to the properties of the biological material.

See also
Domestic robot
Terrainability

== References ==

================================================================================

# General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans

The General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO) is a publicly available bathymetric chart of the world's oceans. The project was conceived with the aim of preparing a global series of charts showing the general shape of the seafloor. Over the years it has become a reference map of the bathymetry of the world's oceans for scientists and others.

Organisation
GEBCO operates under the joint auspices of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO). and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO. Its work is done by an international group of experts in seafloor mapping who develop a range of bathymetric data sets and data products.

Data sets and products
Although originally GEBCO published paper contour charts, today it has moved into the digital age and collects digital depths of the ocean from wherever they are available. GEBCO provides a range of bathymetric data sets and data products, including:

Global gridded bathymetric data sets:
GEBCO_08 Grid — a global bathymetric grid with 30 arc-second spacing, generated by combining quality-controlled ship depth soundings with interpolation between sounding points guided by satellite-derived gravity data.
GEBCO_2014 Grid — an update to the previously released GEBCO_08 Grid.
GEBCO_2019 Grid — an update to the previously released GEBCO_2014 Grid with 15 arc-second resolution.
GEBCO One Minute Grid — a global grid at one arc-minute intervals, based largely on the most recent set of bathymetric contours contained within the GEBCO Digital Atlas.
The grids are available to download from the British Oceanographic Data Centre (BODC) in the form of netCDF files, along with free software for displaying and accessing data in ASCII and netCDF. The grids can be used with the Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) system.

The GEBCO Digital Atlas — a two volume CDROM set which contains:
The GEBCO One Minute Grid
A global set of digital bathymetric contours and coastlines
The GEBCO Gazetteer of Undersea Feature Names: a digital gazetteer of undersea feature names.
A software interface for viewing and accessing the data sets
The GEBCO Gazetteer of Undersea Feature Names — a digital gazetteer of undersea feature names used on sheets and products of GEBCO and Regional International Bathymetric Charts (IBC) projects, and on international (INT) nautical charts. It is available to be downloaded from the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO).
The GEBCO world map — a global, coloured, paper map of the bathymetry of the world's oceans based upon the GEBCO One Minute Grid. The map is available to be downloaded in the form of JPEG file.

Project history
The GEBCO chart series was initiated in 1903 by an international group of geographers and oceanographers, under the leadership of Prince Albert I of Monaco. At that time there was an explosion of interest in the study of the natural world and this group recognized the importance of a set of maps describing the shape of the ocean floor. The first hundred years of the project were described in the book The History of GEBCO 1903-2003 published by GITC in 2003. Nowadays GEBCO's role has become increasingly important, due to the increased interest in the oceans for scientific research and for the exploitation and conservation of resources.
Since 1903, five separate editions of paper, bathymetric contour charts covering the whole world have been produced. GEBCO is now maintained in digital form as the GEBCO Digital Atlas.

Training
The Nippon Foundation of Japan has provided funding for GEBCO to train a new generation of scientists and hydrographers in ocean bathymetry. The 12-month course, leading to a Postgraduate Certificate in Ocean Bathymetry (PCOB), has been held at the University of New Hampshire, USA, since 2004. 60 GEBCO scholars from 31 different countries have completed the course and are supporting GEBCO programs.

Seabed 2030 Project
The Nippon Foundation-GEBCO Seabed 2030 Project, which aims to motivate a number of collaborators to create a full map of the ocean floor, was launched in 2016. There are four Seabed 2030 centres, which coordinate mapping activities in different regions, gather and compile the bathymetric information, and partner with existing mapping activities within their regions. The Seabed 2030 Global Center is responsible for "producing and delivering global GEBCO products".
GEBCO is the only intergovernmental body with a mandate to map the whole ocean floor. At the beginning of the project, only 6 per cent of the world's ocean bottom had been surveyed to today's standards; as of June 2022, the project had recorded 23.4 per cent mapped. About 14,500,000 square kilometres (5,600,000 sq mi) of new bathymetric data was included in the GEBCO grid in 2019, and an additional area equivalent to the size of Europe between 2020 and 2022. Seabed 2030 initially aimed at using a global 100m grid, but this has been updated to use a variable resolution grid, with larger squares over deep ocean floor and smaller ones in shallow waters.
Governments, institutions and companies have been contributing to the effort, and Seabed 2030 is crowdsourcing information from any party that is able to contribute, including small boats. The British Antarctic Survey is assisting the effort by varying the routes of its boats in order to map different parts of the sea floor.

References
External links
Official website
GEBCO Digital Atlas Archived 2016-12-25 at the Wayback Machine
GEBCO's gridded data sets
GEBCO – Maps of world ocean bathymetry
Derived products from the GEBCO 2019 Grid like contours and a classification
The Academy Of Positioning Marine And Bathymetry (APOMAB) – an independent, no-profit, no-governmental website. It provides a forum for all those involved in activities related to the disciplines of marine positioning and bathymetry members who live or work anywhere in the world.
GEBCO SCOPE is a website for diverse usage of GEBCO product for education purposes and other outreach activities such as posters and presentation materials.

================================================================================

# Atlantic Ocean

The Atlantic Ocean is the second largest of the world's five oceanic divisions, with an area of about 85,133,000 km2 (32,870,000 sq mi). It covers approximately 17% of Earth's surface and about 24% of its water surface area. During the Age of Discovery, it was known for separating the New World of the Americas (North America and South America) from the Old World of Afro-Eurasia (Africa, Asia, and Europe).
Through its separation of Afro-Eurasia from the Americas, the Atlantic Ocean has played a central role in the development of human society, globalization, and the histories of many nations. While the Norse were the first known humans to cross the Atlantic, it was the expedition of Christopher Columbus in 1492 that proved to be the most consequential. Columbus's expedition ushered in an age of exploration and colonization of the Americas by European powers, most notably Portugal, Spain, France, and the United Kingdom. From the 16th to 19th centuries, the Atlantic Ocean was the center of both an eponymous slave trade and the Columbian exchange while occasionally hosting naval battles. Such naval battles, as well as growing trade from regional American powers like the United States and Brazil, both increased in degree during the early 20th century, and while no major military conflicts have taken place in the Atlantic recently, the ocean remains a core component of trade around the world.
The Atlantic Ocean's temperatures vary by location. For example, the South Atlantic maintains warm temperatures year-round, as its basin countries are tropical. The North Atlantic maintains a temperate climate, as its basin countries are temperate and have seasons of extremely low temperatures and high temperatures. 
The Atlantic Ocean occupies an elongated, S-shaped basin extending longitudinally between Europe and Africa to the east, and the Americas to the west. As one component of the interconnected World Ocean, it is connected in the north to the Arctic Ocean, to the Pacific Ocean in the southwest, the Indian Ocean in the southeast, and the Southern Ocean in the south. Other definitions describe the Atlantic as extending southward to Antarctica. The Atlantic Ocean is divided in two parts, the northern and southern Atlantic, by the Equator.

Toponymy
The oldest known mentions of an "Atlantic" sea come from Stesichorus around mid-sixth century BC (Sch. A. R. 1. 211): Atlantikôi pelágei (Ancient Greek: Ἀτλαντικῷ πελάγει, 'the Atlantic sea', etym. 'Sea of Atlas') and in The Histories of Herodotus around 450 BC (Hdt. 1.202.4): Atlantis thalassa (Ancient Greek: Ἀτλαντὶς θάλασσα, 'Sea of Atlas' or 'the Atlantic sea') where the name refers to "the sea beyond the pillars of Hercules" which is said to be part of the sea that surrounds all land. In these uses, the name refers to Atlas, the Titan in Greek mythology, who supported the heavens and who later appeared as a frontispiece in medieval maps and also lent his name to modern atlases. On the other hand, to early Greek sailors and in ancient Greek mythological literature such as the Iliad and the Odyssey, this all-encompassing ocean was instead known as Oceanus, the gigantic river that encircled the world; in contrast to the enclosed seas well known to the Greeks: the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. In contrast, the term "Atlantic" originally referred specifically to the Atlas Mountains in Morocco and the sea off the Strait of Gibraltar and the West African coast.
The term "Aethiopian Ocean", derived from Ancient Ethiopia, was applied to the southern Atlantic as late as the mid-19th century. During the Age of Discovery, the Atlantic was also known to English cartographers as the Great Western Ocean.

The pond is a term often used by British and American speakers in reference to the northern Atlantic Ocean, as a form of meiosis, or ironic understatement. It is used mostly when referring to events or circumstances "on this side of the pond" or "on the other side of the pond" or "across the pond", rather than to discuss the ocean itself. The term dates to 1640, first appearing in print in a pamphlet released during the reign of Charles I, and reproduced in 1869 in Nehemiah Wallington's Historical Notices of Events Occurring Chiefly in The Reign of Charles I, where "great Pond" is used in reference to the Atlantic Ocean by Francis Windebank, Charles I's Secretary of State.

Extent and data
The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) defined the limits of the oceans and seas in 1953, but some of these definitions have been revised since then and some are not recognized by various authorities, institutions, and countries, for example the CIA World Factbook. Correspondingly, the extent and number of oceans and seas vary.
The Atlantic Ocean is bounded on the west by North and South America. It connects to the Arctic Ocean through the Labrador Sea, Denmark Strait, Greenland Sea, Norwegian Sea and Barents Sea with the northern divider passing through Iceland and Svalbard. To the east, the boundaries of the ocean proper are Europe and Africa: the Strait of Gibraltar (where it connects with the Mediterranean Sea – one of its marginal seas – and, in turn, the Black Sea, both of which also touch upon Asia).
In the southeast, the Atlantic merges into the Indian Ocean. The 20° East meridian, running south from Cape Agulhas to Antarctica defines its border. In the 1953 definition it extends south to Antarctica, while in later maps it is bounded at the 60° parallel by the Southern Ocean.
The Atlantic has irregular coasts indented by numerous bays, gulfs and seas. These include the Baltic Sea, Black Sea, Caribbean Sea, Davis Strait, Denmark Strait, part of the Drake Passage, Gulf of Mexico, Labrador Sea, Mediterranean Sea, North Sea, Norwegian Sea, almost all of the Scotia Sea, and other tributary water bodies. Including these marginal seas the coast line of the Atlantic measures 111,866 km (69,510 mi) compared to 135,663 km (84,297 mi) for the Pacific.
Including its marginal seas, the Atlantic covers an area of 106,460,000 km2 (41,100,000 sq mi) or 23.5% of the global ocean and has a volume of 310,410,900 km3 (74,471,500 cu mi) or 23.3% of the total volume of the Earth's oceans. Excluding its marginal seas, the Atlantic covers 81,760,000 km2 (31,570,000 sq mi) and has a volume of 305,811,900 km3 (73,368,200 cu mi). The North Atlantic covers 41,490,000 km2 (16,020,000 sq mi) (11.5%) and the South Atlantic 40,270,000 km2 (15,550,000 sq mi) (11.1%). The average depth is 3,646 m (11,962 ft) and the maximum depth, the Milwaukee Deep in the Puerto Rico Trench, is 8,376 m (27,480 ft).

Bathymetry
The bathymetry of the Atlantic is dominated by a submarine mountain range called the Mid-Atlantic Ridge (MAR). It runs from 87°N or 300 km (190 mi) south of the North Pole to the subantarctic Bouvet Island at 54°S. Expeditions to explore the bathymertry of the Atlantic include the Challenger expedition and the German Meteor expedition; as of 2001, Columbia University's Lamont–Doherty Earth Observatory and the United States Navy Hydrographic Office conduct research on the ocean.

Mid-Atlantic Ridge
The MAR divides the Atlantic longitudinally into two halves, in each of which a series of basins are delimited by secondary, transverse ridges. The MAR reaches above 2,000 m (6,600 ft) along most of its length, but is interrupted by larger transform faults at two places: the Romanche Trench near the Equator and the Gibbs fracture zone at 53°N. The MAR is a barrier for bottom water, but at these two transform faults deep water currents can pass from one side to the other.
The MAR rises 2–3 km (1.2–1.9 mi) above the surrounding ocean floor and its rift valley is the divergent boundary between the North American and Eurasian plates in the North Atlantic and the South American and African plates in the South Atlantic. The MAR produces basaltic volcanoes in Eyjafjallajökull, Iceland, and pillow lava on the ocean floor. The depth of water at the apex of the ridge is less than 2,700 m (1,500 fathoms; 8,900 ft) in most places, while the bottom of the ridge is three times as deep.
The MAR is intersected by two perpendicular ridges: the Azores–Gibraltar transform fault, the boundary between the Nubian and Eurasian plates, intersects the MAR at the Azores triple junction, on either side of the Azores microplate, near the 40°N. A much vaguer, nameless boundary, between the North American and South American plates, intersects the MAR near or just north of the Fifteen-Twenty fracture zone, approximately at 16°N.
In the 1870s, the Challenger expedition discovered parts of what is now known as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, or:

An elevated ridge rising to an average height of about 1,900 fathoms [3,500 m; 11,400 ft] below the surface traverses the basins of the North and South Atlantic in a meridianal direction from Cape Farewell, probably its far south at least as Gough Island, following roughly the outlines of the coasts of the Old and the New Worlds. The remainder of the ridge was discovered in the 1920s by the German Meteor expedition using echo-sounding equipment. The exploration of the MAR in the 1950s led to the general acceptance of seafloor spreading and plate tectonics.
Most of the MAR runs under water but where it reaches the surfaces it has produced volcanic islands. While nine of these have collectively been nominated a World Heritage Site for their geological value, four of them are considered of "Outstanding Universal Value" based on their cultural and natural criteria: Þingvellir, Iceland; Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture, Portugal; Gough and Inaccessible Islands, United Kingdom; and Brazilian Atlantic Islands: Fernando de Noronha and Atol das Rocas Reserves, Brazil.

Ocean floor
Continental shelves in the Atlantic are wide off Newfoundland, southernmost South America, and northeastern Europe.
In the western Atlantic carbonate platforms dominate large areas, for example, the Blake Plateau and Bermuda Rise.
The Atlantic is surrounded by passive margins except at a few locations where active margins form deep trenches: the Puerto Rico Trench (8,376 m or 27,480 ft maximum depth) in the western Atlantic and South Sandwich Trench (8,264 m or 27,113 ft) in the South Atlantic. There are numerous submarine canyons off northeastern North America, western Europe, and northwestern Africa. Some of these canyons extend along the continental rises and farther into the abyssal plains as deep-sea channels.
In 1922, a historic moment in cartography and oceanography occurred. The USS Stewart used a Navy Sonic Depth Finder to draw a continuous map across the bed of the Atlantic. This involved little guesswork because the idea of sonar is straightforward with pulses being sent from the vessel, which bounce off the ocean floor, then return to the vessel. The deep ocean floor is thought to be fairly flat with occasional deeps, abyssal plains, trenches, seamounts, basins, plateaus, canyons, and some guyots. Various shelves along the margins of the continents constitute about 11% of the bottom topography with few deep channels cut across the continental rise.
The mean depth between 60°N and 60°S is 3,730 m (12,240 ft), or close to the average for the global ocean, with a modal depth between 4,000 and 5,000 m (13,000 and 16,000 ft).
In the South Atlantic the Walvis Ridge and Rio Grande Rise form barriers to ocean currents.
The Laurentian Abyss is found off the eastern coast of Canada.

Water characteristics
Surface water temperatures, which vary with latitude, current systems, and season and reflect the latitudinal distribution of solar energy, range from below −2 °C (28 °F) to over 30 °C (86 °F). Maximum temperatures occur north of the equator, and minimum values are found in the polar regions. In the middle latitudes, the area of maximum temperature variations, values may vary by 7–8 °C (13–14 °F).
From October to June the surface is usually covered with sea ice in the Labrador Sea, Denmark Strait, and Baltic Sea.
The Coriolis effect circulates North Atlantic water in a clockwise direction, whereas South Atlantic water circulates counter-clockwise. The south tides in the Atlantic Ocean are semi-diurnal; that is, two high tides occur every 24 lunar hours. In latitudes above 40° North some east–west oscillation, known as the North Atlantic oscillation, occurs.

Salinity
On average, the Atlantic is the saltiest major ocean; surface water salinity in the open ocean ranges from 33 to 37 parts per thousand (3.3–3.7%) by mass and varies with latitude and season. Evaporation, precipitation, river inflow and sea ice melting influence surface salinity values. Although the lowest salinity values are just north of the equator (because of heavy tropical rainfall), in general, the lowest values are in the high latitudes and along coasts where large rivers enter. Maximum salinity values occur at about 25° north and south, in subtropical regions with low rainfall and high evaporation.
The high surface salinity in the Atlantic, on which the Atlantic thermohaline circulation is dependent, is maintained by two processes: the Agulhas Leakage/Rings, which brings salty Indian Ocean waters into the South Atlantic, and the "Atmospheric Bridge", which evaporates subtropical Atlantic waters and exports it to the Pacific.

Water masses
The Atlantic Ocean consists of four major, upper water masses with distinct temperature and salinity. The Atlantic subarctic upper water in the northernmost North Atlantic is the source for subarctic intermediate water and North Atlantic intermediate water. North Atlantic central water can be divided into the eastern and western North Atlantic central water since the western part is strongly affected by the Gulf Stream and therefore the upper layer is closer to underlying fresher subpolar intermediate water. The eastern water is saltier because of its proximity to Mediterranean water. North Atlantic central water flows into South Atlantic central water at 15°N.
There are five intermediate waters: four low-salinity waters formed at subpolar latitudes and one high-salinity formed through evaporation. Arctic intermediate water flows from the north to become the source for North Atlantic deep water, south of the Greenland-Scotland sill. These two intermediate waters have different salinity in the western and eastern basins. The wide range of salinities in the North Atlantic is caused by the asymmetry of the northern subtropical gyre and a large number of contributions from a wide range of sources: Labrador Sea, Norwegian-Greenland Sea, Mediterranean, and South Atlantic Intermediate Water.
The North Atlantic deep water (NADW) is a complex of four water masses, two that form by deep convection in the open ocean – classical and upper Labrador sea water – and two that form from the inflow of dense water across the Greenland-Iceland-Scotland sill – Denmark Strait and Iceland-Scotland overflow water. Along its path across Earth the composition of the NADW is affected by other water masses, especially Antarctic bottom water and Mediterranean overflow water.
The NADW is fed by a flow of warm shallow water into the northern North Atlantic which is responsible for the anomalous warm climate in Europe. Changes in the formation of NADW have been linked to global climate changes in the past. Since human-made substances were introduced into the environment, the path of the NADW can be traced throughout its course by measuring tritium and radiocarbon from nuclear weapon tests in the 1960s and CFCs.

Gyres
The clockwise warm-water North Atlantic Gyre occupies the northern Atlantic, and the counter-clockwise warm-water South Atlantic Gyre appears in the southern Atlantic.
In the North Atlantic, surface circulation is dominated by three inter-connected currents: the Gulf Stream which flows north-east from the North American coast at Cape Hatteras; the North Atlantic Current, a branch of the Gulf Stream which flows northward from the Grand Banks; and the Subpolar Front, an extension of the North Atlantic Current, a wide, vaguely defined region separating the subtropical gyre from the subpolar gyre. This system of currents transports warm water into the North Atlantic, without which temperatures in the North Atlantic and Europe would plunge dramatically.

North of the North Atlantic Gyre, the cyclonic North Atlantic Subpolar Gyre plays a key role in climate variability. It is governed by ocean currents from marginal seas and regional topography, rather than being steered by wind, both in the deep ocean and at sea level.
The subpolar gyre forms an important part of the global thermohaline circulation. Its eastern portion includes eddying branches of the North Atlantic Current which transport warm, saline waters from the subtropics to the northeastern Atlantic. There this water is cooled during winter and forms return currents that merge along the eastern continental slope of Greenland where they form an intense (40–50 Sv) current which flows around the continental margins of the Labrador Sea. A third of this water becomes part of the deep portion of the North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW). The NADW, in turn, feeds the meridional overturning circulation (MOC), the northward heat transport of which is threatened by anthropogenic climate change. Large variations in the subpolar gyre on a decade-century scale, associated with the North Atlantic oscillation, are especially pronounced in Labrador Sea Water, the upper layers of the MOC.
The South Atlantic is dominated by the anti-cyclonic southern subtropical gyre. The South Atlantic Central Water originates in this gyre, while Antarctic Intermediate Water originates in the upper layers of the circumpolar region, near the Drake Passage and the Falkland Islands. Both these currents receive some contribution from the Indian Ocean. On the African east coast, the small cyclonic Angola Gyre lies embedded in the large subtropical gyre.
The southern subtropical gyre is partly masked by a wind-induced Ekman layer. The residence time of the gyre is 4.4–8.5 years. North Atlantic Deep Water flows southward below the thermocline of the subtropical gyre.

Sargasso Sea
The Sargasso Sea in the western North Atlantic can be defined as the area where two species of Sargassum (S. fluitans and natans) float, an area 4,000 km (2,500 mi) wide and encircled by the Gulf Stream, North Atlantic Drift, and North Equatorial Current. This population of seaweed probably originated from Tertiary ancestors on the European shores of the former Tethys Ocean and has, if so, maintained itself by vegetative growth, floating in the ocean for millions of years.
Other species endemic to the Sargasso Sea include the sargassum fish, a predator with algae-like appendages which hovers motionless among the Sargassum. Fossils of similar fishes have been found in fossil bays of the former Tethys Ocean, in what is now the Carpathian region, that were similar to the Sargasso Sea. It is possible that the population in the Sargasso Sea migrated to the Atlantic as the Tethys closed at the end of the Miocene around 17 Ma. The origin of the Sargasso fauna and flora remained enigmatic for centuries. The fossils found in the Carpathians in the mid-20th century often called the "quasi-Sargasso assemblage", finally showed that this assemblage originated in the Carpathian Basin from where it migrated over Sicily to the central Atlantic where it evolved into modern species of the Sargasso Sea.
The location of the spawning ground for European eels remained unknown for decades. In the early 19th century it was discovered that the southern Sargasso Sea is the spawning ground for both the European and American eel and that the former migrate more than 5,000 km (3,100 mi) and the latter 2,000 km (1,200 mi). Ocean currents such as the Gulf Stream transport eel larvae from the Sargasso Sea to foraging areas in North America, Europe, and northern Africa. Recent but disputed research suggests that eels possibly use Earth's magnetic field to navigate through the ocean both as larvae and as adults.

Climate
The climate is influenced by the temperatures of the surface waters and water currents as well as winds. Because of the ocean's great capacity to store and release heat, maritime climates are more moderate and have less extreme seasonal variations than inland climates. Precipitation can be approximated from coastal weather data and air temperature from water temperatures.
The oceans are the major source of atmospheric moisture that is obtained through evaporation. Climatic zones vary with latitude; the warmest zones stretch across the Atlantic north of the equator. The coldest zones are in high latitudes, with the coldest regions corresponding to the areas covered by sea ice. Ocean currents influence the climate by transporting warm and cold waters to other regions. The winds that are cooled or warmed when blowing over these currents influence adjacent land areas.
The Gulf Stream and its northern extension towards Europe, the North Atlantic Drift is thought to have at least some influence on climate. For example, the Gulf Stream helps moderate winter temperatures along the coastline of southeastern North America, keeping it warmer in winter along the coast than inland areas. The Gulf Stream also keeps extreme temperatures from occurring on the Florida Peninsula. In the higher latitudes, the North Atlantic Drift, warms the atmosphere over the oceans, keeping the British Isles and northwestern Europe mild and cloudy, and not severely cold in winter, like other locations at the same high latitude. The cold water currents contribute to heavy fog off the coast of eastern Canada (the Grand Banks of Newfoundland area) and Africa's northwestern coast. In general, winds transport moisture and air over land areas.

Natural hazards
Every winter, the Icelandic Low produces frequent storms. Icebergs are common from early February to the end of July across the shipping lanes near the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. The ice season is longer in the polar regions, but there is little shipping in those areas.
Hurricanes are a hazard in the western parts of the North Atlantic during the summer and autumn. Due to a consistently strong wind shear and a weak Intertropical Convergence Zone, South Atlantic tropical cyclones are rare.

Geology and plate tectonics
The Atlantic Ocean is underlain mostly by dense mafic oceanic crust made up of basalt and gabbro and overlain by fine clay, silt and siliceous ooze on the abyssal plain. The continental margins and continental shelf mark lower density, but greater thickness felsic continental rock that is often much older than that of the seafloor. The oldest oceanic crust in the Atlantic is up to 145 million years and is situated off the west coast of Africa and the east coast of North America, or on either side of the South Atlantic.
In many places, the continental shelf and continental slope are covered in thick sedimentary layers. For instance, on the North American side of the ocean, large carbonate deposits formed in warm shallow waters such as Florida and the Bahamas, while coarse river outwash sands and silt are common in shallow shelf areas like the Georges Bank. Coarse sand, boulders, and rocks were transported into some areas, such as off the coast of Nova Scotia or the Gulf of Maine during the Pleistocene ice ages.

Central Atlantic
The break-up of Pangaea began in the central Atlantic, between North America and Northwest Africa, where rift basins opened during the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic. This period also saw the first stages of the uplift of the Atlas Mountains. The exact timing is controversial with estimates ranging from 200 to 170 Ma.
The opening of the Atlantic Ocean coincided with the initial break-up of the supercontinent Pangaea, both of which were initiated by the eruption of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP), one of the most extensive and voluminous large igneous provinces in Earth's history associated with the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event, one of Earth's major extinction events.
Theoliitic dikes, sills, and lava flows from the CAMP eruption at 200 Ma have been found in West Africa, eastern North America, and northern South America. The extent of the volcanism has been estimated to 4.5×106 km2 (1.7×106 sq mi) of which 2.5×106 km2 (9.7×105 sq mi) covered what is now northern and central Brazil.
The formation of the Central American Isthmus closed the Central American Seaway at the end of the Pliocene 2.8 Ma ago. The formation of the isthmus resulted in the migration and extinction of many land-living animals, known as the Great American Interchange, but the closure of the seaway resulted in a "Great American Schism" as it affected ocean currents, salinity, and temperatures in both the Atlantic and Pacific. Marine organisms on both sides of the isthmus became isolated and either diverged or went extinct.

North Atlantic
Geologically, the North Atlantic is the area delimited to the south by two conjugate margins, Newfoundland and Iberia, and to the north by the Arctic Eurasian Basin. The opening of the North Atlantic closely followed the margins of its predecessor, the Iapetus Ocean, and spread from the central Atlantic in six stages: Iberia–Newfoundland, Porcupine–North America, Eurasia–Greenland, Eurasia–North America. Active and inactive spreading systems in this area are marked by the interaction with the Iceland hotspot.
Seafloor spreading led to the extension of the crust and the formation of troughs and sedimentary basins. The Rockall Trough opened between 105 and 84 million years ago although the rift failed along with one leading into the Bay of Biscay.
Spreading began opening the Labrador Sea around 61 million years ago, continuing until 36 million years ago. Geologists distinguish two magmatic phases. One from 62 to 58 million years ago predates the separation of Greenland from northern Europe while the second from 56 to 52 million years ago happened as the separation occurred.
Iceland began to form 62 million years ago due to a particularly concentrated mantle plume. Large quantities of basalt erupted at this time period are found on Baffin Island, Greenland, the Faroe Islands, and Scotland, with ash falls in Western Europe acting as a stratigraphic marker. The opening of the North Atlantic caused a significant uplift of continental crust along the coast. For instance, despite 7 km thick basalt, Gunnbjorn Field in East Greenland is the highest point on the island, elevated enough that it exposes older Mesozoic sedimentary rocks at its base, similar to old lava fields above sedimentary rocks in the uplifted Hebrides of western Scotland.
The North Atlantic Ocean contains about 810 seamounts, most of them situated along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The OSPAR database (Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic) mentions 104 seamounts: 74 within national exclusive economic zones. Of these seamounts, 46 are located close to the Iberian Peninsula.

South Atlantic
West Gondwana (South America and Africa) broke up in the Early Cretaceous to form the South Atlantic. The apparent fit between the coastlines of the two continents was noted on the first maps that included the South Atlantic and it was also the subject of the first computer-assisted plate tectonic reconstructions in 1965. This magnificent fit, however, has since then proven problematic and later reconstructions have introduced various deformation zones along the shorelines to accommodate the northward-propagating break-up. Intra-continental rifts and deformations have also been introduced to subdivide both continental plates into sub-plates.
Geologically, the South Atlantic can be divided into four segments: equatorial segment, from 10°N to the Romanche fracture zone (RFZ); central segment, from RFZ to Florianopolis fracture zone (FFZ, north of Walvis Ridge and Rio Grande Rise); southern segment, from FFZ to the Agulhas–Falkland fracture zone (AFFZ); and Falkland segment, south of AFFZ.
In the southern segment the Early Cretaceous (133–130 Ma) intensive magmatism of the Paraná–Etendeka Large Igneous Province produced by the Tristan hotspot resulted in an estimated volume of 1.5×106 to 2.0×106 km3 (3.6×105 to 4.8×105 cu mi). It covered an area of 1.2×106 to 1.6×106 km2 (4.6×105 to 6.2×105 sq mi) in Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay and 0.8×105 km2 (3.1×104 sq mi) in Africa. Dyke swarms in Brazil, Angola, eastern Paraguay, and Namibia, however, suggest the LIP originally covered a much larger area and also indicate failed rifts in all these areas. Associated offshore basaltic flows reach as far south as the Falkland Islands and South Africa. Traces of magmatism in both offshore and onshore basins in the central and southern segments have been dated to 147–49 Ma with two peaks between 143 and 121 Ma and 90–60 Ma.
In the Falkland segment rifting began with dextral movements between the Patagonia and Colorado sub-plates between the Early Jurassic (190 Ma) and the Early Cretaceous (126.7 Ma). Around 150 Ma sea-floor spreading propagated northward into the southern segment. No later than 130 Ma rifting had reached the Walvis Ridge–Rio Grande Rise.
In the central segment, rifting started to break Africa in two by opening the Benue Trough around 118 Ma. Rifting in the central segment, however, coincided with the Cretaceous Normal Superchron (also known as the Cretaceous quiet period), a 40 Ma period without magnetic reversals, which makes it difficult to date sea-floor spreading in this segment.
The equatorial segment is the last phase of the break-up, but, because it is located on the Equator, magnetic anomalies cannot be used for dating. Various estimates date the propagation of seafloor spreading in this segment and consequent opening of the Equatorial Atlantic Gateway (EAG) to the period 120–96 Ma. This final stage, nevertheless, coincided with or resulted in the end of continental extension in Africa.
About 50 Ma the opening of the Drake Passage resulted from a change in the motions and separation rate of the South American and Antarctic plates. First, small ocean basins opened and a shallow gateway appeared during the Middle Eocene. 34–30 Ma a deeper seaway developed, followed by an Eocene–Oligocene climatic deterioration and the growth of the Antarctic ice sheet.

Closure of the Atlantic
An embryonic subduction margin is potentially developing west of Gibraltar. The Gibraltar Arc in the western Mediterranean is migrating westward into the central Atlantic where it joins the converging African and Eurasian plates. Together these three tectonic forces are slowly developing into a new subduction system in the eastern Atlantic Basin. Meanwhile, the Scotia Arc and Caribbean plate in the western Atlantic Basin are eastward-propagating subduction systems that might, together with the Gibraltar system, represent the beginning of the closure of the Atlantic Ocean and the final stage of the Atlantic Wilson cycle.

History
Old World
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) studies indicate that 80,000–60,000 years ago a major demographic expansion within Africa, derived from a single, small population, coincided with the emergence of behavioral complexity and the rapid MIS 5–4 environmental changes. This group of people not only expanded over the whole of Africa, but also started to disperse out of Africa into Asia, Europe, and Australasia around 65,000 years ago and quickly replaced the archaic humans in these regions. During the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) 20,000 years ago humans had to abandon their initial settlements along the European North Atlantic coast and retreat to the Mediterranean. Following rapid climate changes at the end of the LGM this region was repopulated by Magdalenian culture. Other hunter-gatherers followed in waves interrupted by hazards such as the Laacher See volcanic eruption, the inundation of Doggerland (now the North Sea), and the formation of the Baltic Sea. The European coasts of the North Atlantic were permanently populated about 9,000–8.5,000 years ago.
This human dispersal left abundant traces along the coasts of the Atlantic Ocean. 50 kya-old, deeply stratified shell middens found in Ysterfontein on the western coast of South Africa are associated with the Middle Stone Age (MSA). The MSA population was small and dispersed and the rate of their reproduction and exploitation was less intense than those of later generations. While their middens resemble 12–11 kya-old Late Stone Age (LSA) middens found on every inhabited continent, the 50–45 kya-old Enkapune Ya Muto in Kenya probably represents the oldest traces of the first modern humans to disperse out of Africa.

The same development can be seen in Europe. In La Riera Cave (23–13 kya) in Asturias, Spain, only some 26,600 molluscs were deposited over 10 kya. In contrast, 8–7 kya-old shell middens in Portugal, Denmark, and Brazil generated thousands of tons of debris and artefacts. The Ertebølle middens in Denmark, for example, accumulated 2,000 m3 (71,000 cu ft) of shell deposits representing some 50 million molluscs over only a thousand years. This intensification in the exploitation of marine resources has been described as accompanied by new technologies – such as boats, harpoons, and fish hooks  – because many caves found in the Mediterranean and on the European Atlantic coast have increased quantities of marine shells in their upper levels and reduced quantities in their lower. The earliest exploitation took place on the submerged shelves, now submerged and most settlements now excavated were then located several kilometers from these shelves. The reduced quantities of shells in the lower levels can represent the few shells that were exported inland.

New World
During the LGM the Laurentide Ice Sheet covered most of northern North America while Beringia connected Siberia to Alaska. In 1973, late American geoscientist Paul S. Martin proposed a "blitzkrieg" colonization of the Americas by which Clovis hunters migrated into North America around 13,000 years ago in a single wave through an ice-free corridor in the ice sheet and "spread southward explosively, briefly attaining a density sufficiently large to overkill much of their prey." Others later proposed a "three-wave" migration over the Bering Land Bridge. These hypotheses remained the long-held view regarding the settlement of the Americas, a view challenged by more recent archaeological discoveries: the oldest archaeological sites in the Americas have been found in South America; sites in northeast Siberia report virtually no human presence there during the LGM; and most Clovis artefacts have been found in eastern North America along the Atlantic coast. Furthermore, colonisation models based on mtDNA, yDNA, and atDNA data respectively support neither the "blitzkrieg" nor the "three-wave" hypotheses but they also deliver mutually ambiguous results. Contradictory data from archaeology and genetics will most likely deliver future hypotheses that will, eventually, confirm each other. A proposed route across the Pacific to South America could explain early South American finds and another hypothesis proposes a northern path, through the Canadian Arctic and down the North American Atlantic coast.
Early settlements across the Atlantic have been suggested by alternative theories, ranging from purely hypothetical to mostly disputed, including the Solutrean hypothesis and some of the Pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact theories.

The Norse settlement of the Faroe Islands and Iceland began during the 9th and 10th centuries. A settlement on Greenland was established before 1000 CE, but contact with it was lost in 1409 and it was finally abandoned during the early Little Ice Age. This setback was caused by a range of factors: an unsustainable economy resulted in erosion and denudation, while conflicts with the local Inuit resulted in the failure to adapt their Arctic technologies; a colder climate resulted in starvation, and the colony got economically marginalized as the Great Plague harvested its victims on Iceland in the 15th century.
Iceland was initially settled 865–930 CE following a warm period when winter temperatures hovered around 2 °C (36 °F) which made farming favorable at high latitudes. This did not last, however, and temperatures quickly dropped; at 1080 CE summer temperatures had reached a maximum of 5 °C (41 °F). The Landnámabók (Book of Settlement) records disastrous famines during the first century of settlement – "men ate foxes and ravens" and "the old and helpless were killed and thrown over cliffs" – and by the early 1200s hay had to be abandoned for short-season crops such as barley.

Atlantic World
Christopher Columbus reached the Americas in 1492, sailing under the Spanish flag. Six years later Vasco da Gama reached India under the Portuguese flag, by navigating south around the Cape of Good Hope, thus proving that the Atlantic and Indian Oceans are connected. In 1500, in his voyage to India following Vasco da Gama, Pedro Álvares Cabral reached Brazil, taken by the currents of the South Atlantic Gyre. Following these explorations, Spain and Portugal quickly conquered and colonized large territories in the New World and forced the Amerindian population into slavery in order to exploit the vast quantities of silver and gold they found. Spain and Portugal monopolized this trade in order to keep other European nations out, but conflicting interests nevertheless led to a series of Spanish-Portuguese wars. A peace treaty mediated by the Pope divided the conquered territories into Spanish and Portuguese sectors while keeping other colonial powers away. England, France, and the Dutch Republic enviously watched the Spanish and Portuguese wealth grow and allied themselves with pirates such as Henry Mainwaring and Alexandre Exquemelin. They could explore the convoys leaving the Americas because prevailing winds and currents made the transport of heavy metals slow and predictable.

In the colonies of the Americas, depredation, smallpox and other diseases, and slavery quickly reduced the indigenous population of the Americas to the extent that the Atlantic slave trade was introduced by colonists to replace them – a trade that became the norm and an integral part of the colonization. Between the 15th century and 1888, when Brazil became the last part of the Americas to end the slave trade, an estimated 9.5 million enslaved Africans were shipped into the New World, most of them destined for agricultural labor. The slave trade was officially abolished in the British Empire and the United States in 1808, and slavery itself was abolished in the British Empire in 1838 and in the United States in 1865 after the Civil War.
From Columbus to the Industrial Revolution trans-Atlantic trade, including colonialism and slavery, became crucial for Western Europe. For European countries with direct access to the Atlantic (including Britain, France, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain) 1500–1800 was a period of sustained growth during which these countries grew richer than those in Eastern Europe and Asia. Colonialism evolved as part of the trans-Atlantic trade, but this trade also strengthened the position of merchant groups at the expense of monarchs. Growth was more rapid in non-absolutist countries, such as Britain and the Netherlands, and more limited in absolutist monarchies, such as Portugal, Spain, and France, where profit mostly or exclusively benefited the monarchy and its allies.
Trans-Atlantic trade also resulted in increasing urbanization: in European countries facing the Atlantic, urbanization grew from 8% in 1300, 10.1% in 1500, to 24.5% in 1850; in other European countries from 10% in 1300, 11.4% in 1500, to 17% in 1850. Likewise, GDP doubled in Atlantic countries but rose by only 30% in the rest of Europe. By the end of the 17th century, the volume of the Trans-Atlantic trade had surpassed that of the Mediterranean trade.

Economy
The Atlantic has contributed significantly to the development and economy of surrounding countries. Besides major transatlantic transportation and communication routes, the Atlantic offers abundant petroleum deposits in the sedimentary rocks of the continental shelves.
The Atlantic harbors petroleum and gas fields, fish, marine mammals (seals and whales), sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules, and precious stones. Gold deposits are a mile or two underwater on the ocean floor, however, the deposits are also encased in rock that must be mined through. Currently, there is no cost-effective way to mine or extract gold from the ocean to make a profit. Various international treaties attempt to reduce pollution caused by environmental threats such as oil spills, marine debris, and the incineration of toxic wastes at sea.

Fisheries
The shelves of the Atlantic hosts one of the world's richest fishing resources. The most productive areas include the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, the Scotian Shelf, Georges Bank off Cape Cod, the Bahama Banks, the waters around Iceland, the Irish Sea, the Bay of Fundy, the Dogger Bank of the North Sea, and the Falkland Banks. Fisheries have undergone significant changes since the 1950s and global catches can now be divided into three groups of which only two are observed in the Atlantic: fisheries in the eastern-central and southwest Atlantic oscillate around a globally stable value, the rest of the Atlantic is in overall decline following historical peaks. The third group, "continuously increasing trend since 1950", is only found in the Indian Ocean and western Pacific. UN FAO partitioned the Atlantic into major fishing areas:

Northeast Atlantic

Northeast Atlantic is schematically limited to the 40°00' west longitude (except around Greenland), south to the 36°00' north latitude, and to the 68°30' east longitude, with both the west and east longitude limits reaching to the north pole. The Atlantic's subareas include: Barents Sea; Norwegian Sea, Spitzbergen, and Bear Island; Skagerrak, Kattegat, Sound, Belt Sea, and Baltic Sea; North Sea; Iceland and Faroes Grounds; Rockall, Northwest Coast of Scotland, and North Ireland; Irish Sea, West of Ireland, Porcupine Bank, and eastern and western English Channel; Bay of Biscay; Portuguese Waters; Azores Grounds and Northeast Atlantic South; North of Azores; and East Greenland. There are also two defunct subareas.

In the Northeast Atlantic total catches decreased between the mid-1970s and the 1990s and reached 8.7 million tons in 2013. Blue whiting reached a 2.4 million tons peak in 2004 but was down to 628,000 tons in 2013. Recovery plans for cod, sole, and plaice have reduced mortality in these species. Arctic cod reached its lowest levels in the 1960s–1980s but is now recovered. Arctic saithe and haddock are considered fully fished; Sand eel is overfished as was capelin which has now recovered to fully fished. Limited data makes the state of redfishes and deep-water species difficult to assess but most likely they remain vulnerable to overfishing. Stocks of northern shrimp and Norwegian lobster are in good condition. In the Northeast Atlantic, 21% of stocks are considered overfished.
This zone makes almost three-quarters (72.8%) of European Union fishing catches in 2020. Main fishing EU countries are Denmark, France, the Netherlands and Spain. Most common species include herring, mackerel, and sprats.

Northwest Atlantic
In the Northwest Atlantic landings have decreased from 4.2 million tons in the early 1970s to 1.9 million tons in 2013. During the 21st century, some species have shown weak signs of recovery, including Greenland halibut, yellowtail flounder, Atlantic halibut, haddock, spiny dogfish, while other stocks shown no such signs, including cod, witch flounder, and redfish. Stocks of invertebrates, in contrast, remain at record levels of abundance. 31% of stocks are overfished in the northwest Atlantic.

In 1497, John Cabot became the first Western European since the Vikings to explore mainland North America and one of his major discoveries was the abundant resources of Atlantic cod off Newfoundland. Referred to as "Newfoundland Currency" this discovery yielded some 200 million tons of fish over five centuries. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, new fisheries started to exploit haddock, mackerel, and lobster. From the 1950s to the 1970s, the introduction of European and Asian distant-water fleets in the area dramatically increased the fishing capacity and the number of exploited species. It also expanded the exploited areas from near-shore to the open sea and to great depths to include deep-water species such as redfish, Greenland halibut, witch flounder, and grenadiers. Overfishing in the area was recognized as early as the 1960s but, because this was occurring on international waters, it took until the late 1970s before any attempts to regulate was made. In the early 1990s, this finally resulted in the collapse of the Atlantic northwest cod fishery. The population of a number of deep-sea fishes also collapsed in the process, including American plaice, redfish, and Greenland halibut, together with flounder and grenadier.

Eastern central-Atlantic
In the eastern central-Atlantic small pelagic fishes constitute about 50% of landings with sardine reaching 0.6–1.0 million tons per year. Pelagic fish stocks are considered fully fished or overfished, with sardines south of Cape Bojador the notable exception. Almost half of the stocks are fished at biologically unsustainable levels. Total catches have been fluctuating since the 1970s; reaching 3.9 million tons in 2013 or slightly less than the peak production in 2010.

Western central-Atlantic
In the western central-Atlantic, catches have been decreasing since 2000 and reached 1.3 million tons in 2013. The most important species in the area, Gulf menhaden, reached a million tons in the mid-1980s but only half a million tons in 2013 and is now considered fully fished. Round sardinella was an important species in the 1990s but is now considered overfished. Groupers and snappers are overfished and northern brown shrimp and American cupped oyster are considered fully fished approaching overfished. 44% of stocks are being fished at unsustainable levels.

Southeast Atlantic
In the southeast Atlantic catches have decreased from 3.3 million tons in the early 1970s to 1.3 million tons in 2013. Horse mackerel and hake are the most important species, together representing almost half of the landings. Off South Africa and Namibia deep-water hake and shallow-water Cape hake have recovered to sustainable levels since regulations were introduced in 2006 and the states of southern African pilchard and anchovy have improved to fully fished in 2013.
Southwest Atlantic
In the southwest Atlantic, a peak was reached in the mid-1980s and catches now fluctuate between 1.7 and 2.6 million tons. The most important species, the Argentine shortfin squid, which reached half a million tons in 2013 or half the peak value, is considered fully fished to overfished. Another important species was the Brazilian sardinella, with a production of 100,000 tons in 2013 it is now considered overfished. Half the stocks in this area are being fished at unsustainable levels: Whitehead's round herring has not yet reached fully fished but Cunene horse mackerel is overfished. The sea snail perlemoen abalone is targeted by illegal fishing and remains overfished.

Environmental issues
Endangered species
Endangered marine species include the manatee, seals, sea lions, turtles, and whales. Drift net fishing can kill dolphins, albatrosses and other seabirds (petrels, auks), hastening the fish stock decline and contributing to international disputes.

Waste and pollution
Marine pollution is a generic term for the entry into the ocean of potentially hazardous chemicals or particles. The biggest culprits are rivers and with them many agriculture fertilizer chemicals as well as livestock and human waste. The excess of oxygen-depleting chemicals leads to hypoxia and the creation of a dead zone.

Marine debris, which is also known as marine litter, describes human-created waste floating in a body of water. Oceanic debris tends to accumulate at the center of gyres and coastlines, frequently washing aground where it is known as beach litter. The North Atlantic garbage patch is estimated to be hundreds of kilometers across in size.
Other pollution concerns include agricultural and municipal waste. Municipal pollution comes from the eastern United States, southern Brazil, and eastern Argentina; oil pollution in the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, Lake Maracaibo, Mediterranean Sea, and North Sea; and industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in the Baltic Sea, North Sea, and Mediterranean Sea.
A USAF C-124 aircraft from Dover Air Force Base, Delaware was carrying three nuclear bombs over the Atlantic Ocean when it experienced a loss of power. For their own safety, the crew jettisoned two nuclear bombs, which were never recovered.

Climate change
North Atlantic hurricane activity has increased over past decades because of increased sea surface temperature (SST) at tropical latitudes, changes that can be attributed to either the natural Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) or to anthropogenic climate change.
A 2005 report indicated that the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) slowed down by 30% between 1957 and 2004. In 2024, the research highlighted a significant weakening of the AMOC by approximately 12% over the past two decades. If the AMO were responsible for SST variability, the AMOC would have increased in strength, which is apparently not the case. Furthermore, it is clear from statistical analyses of annual tropical cyclones that these changes do not display multidecadal cyclicity. Therefore, these changes in SST must be caused by human activities.
The ocean mixed layer plays an important role in heat storage over seasonal and decadal time scales, whereas deeper layers are affected over millennia and have a heat capacity about 50 times that of the mixed layer. This heat uptake provides a time-lag for climate change but it also results in thermal expansion of the oceans which contributes to sea level rise. 21st-century global warming will probably result in an equilibrium sea-level rise five times greater than today, whilst melting of glaciers, including that of the Greenland ice sheet, expected to have virtually no effect during the 21st century, will likely result in a sea-level rise of 3–6 metres (9.8–19.7 ft) over a millennium.

See also
Atlantic Revolutions
List of countries and territories bordering the Atlantic Ocean
List of seas on Earth § Atlantic Ocean
List of rivers of the Americas by coastline § Atlantic Ocean coast
Seven Seas
Shipwrecks in the Atlantic Ocean
Atlantic hurricanes
Piracy in the Atlantic World
Transatlantic crossing
South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
Natural delimitation between the Pacific and South Atlantic oceans by the Scotia Arc

References
Sources
Further reading
Dickson, Henry Newton (1911). "Atlantic Ocean" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 2 (11th ed.). pp. 855–857.
Winchester, Simon (2010). Atlantic: A Vast Ocean of a Million Stories. HarperCollins UK. ISBN 978-0-00-734137-5.

External links

Atlantic Ocean. Cartage.org.lb (archived)
"Map of Atlantic Coast of North America from the Chesapeake Bay to Florida" from 1639 via the Library of Congress

================================================================================

# Bathymetric chart

A bathymetric chart is a type of isarithmic map that depicts the submerged bathymetry and physiographic features of ocean and sea bottoms. Their primary purpose is to provide detailed depth contours of ocean topography as well as provide the size, shape and distribution of underwater features. 
Topographic maps display elevation above ground (topography) and are complementary to bathymetric charts. Bathymetric charts showcase depth using a series of lines and points at equal intervals, called depth contours or isobaths (a type of contour line). A closed shape with increasingly smaller shapes inside of it can indicate an ocean trench or a seamount, or underwater mountain, depending on whether the depths increase or decrease going inward.
Bathymetric surveys and charts are associated with the science of oceanography, particularly marine geology, and underwater engineering or other specialized purposes.

Bathymetric data used to produce charts can also be converted to bathymetric profiles which are vertical sections through a feature.

History
Ancient Egypt
The use of bathymetry and the development of bathymetric charts dates back around the 19th century BC to ancient Egypt. Depictions on tomb walls such as the bas-relief carvings of Deir al-Bahri commissioned by Queen Hatshepsut in the 16th century BC show ancient mariners using long slender poles as sounding poles to determine the depth of the Nile River and into the Nile River Delta.

Ancient Greece
The first written account and mapped records of sounding did not occur until 1000 years after the Egyptians had begun sounding and mapping the Nile. The Greek historian Herodotus writes of a sounding in 66 feet of water of the mouth of the Nile in the river delta. He writes of yellow mud being brought up similar to the same that was deposited with the yearly floods. These accounts show a heightened awareness of regional depths and seafloor characteristics among ancient mariners and demonstrate that discoveries in bathymetry and the use of bathymetric charts had progressed significantly.

Ancient Rome
The New Testament recounts soundings being taken with the shipwreck of Paul on the island of Malta in the Book of Acts. Chapter 27, verses 27-44 recount the experience:27 "...as we were driven up and down in Adria, about midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some country;"
28 "And sounded, and found it twenty fathoms: and when they had gone a little further, they sounded again, and found it fifteen fathoms."
29 "Then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast four anchors out of the stern..."
39 "And when it was day, they knew not the land..."
40 "And when they had taken up the anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea . . . and made toward shore."

41 And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmoveable, but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves.Verse 39 states that "they knew not the land" indicating that their knowledge of sea was obtained from the experiences of others as well as the memory of having been there before. Sailing directions called a periplus did exist by the First Century A.D. giving general coastal configurations. Commercially available charts of the depths of the sea and surrounding coast would not be available for almost another thousand years.

Early modern period
Up to this point, bathymetric charts were rare as mariners continued to rely on heavy ropes and lead weights to take depth readings and chart the open ocean. Minor advances in the surveying and depth charting of the oceans occurred in the 200 years since Columbus sailed to the Americas. In 1647, Robert Dudley published the atlas, 'Dell'Arcano del Mare' (Secrets of the Sea). His work far outpaced anything that had been published previously with maps and charts constructed in the Mercator projection as well as containing some of the first charts to show printed depths on the North American Atlantic Seaboard. His publication provided the groundwork for future mariners and inventors to continue to develop new and inventive ways to produce high quality charts and surveys of the world's lakes and oceans.

Comparison with hydrographic chart
A bathymetric chart differs from a hydrographic chart in that accurate presentation of the underwater features is the goal, while safe navigation is the requirement for the hydrographic chart.
A hydrographic chart will obscure the actual features to present a simplified version to help mariners avoid underwater hazards.

Joining a bathymetric chart and topographic map
In an ideal case, the joining of a bathymetric chart and topographic map of the same scale and projection of the same geographic area would be seamless. The only difference would be that the values begin increasing after crossing the zero at the designated sea level datum. Thus the topographic map's mountains have the greatest values while the bathymetric chart's greatest depths have the greatest values.
Simply put, the bathymetric chart is intended to show the land if overlying waters were removed in exactly the same manner as the topographic map.

Within hydrography
Bathymetric surveys are a subset of the science of hydrography. They differ slightly from the surveys required to create the product of hydrography in its more limited application and as conducted by the national and international agencies tasked with producing charts and publications for safe navigation. That chart product is more accurately termed a navigation or hydrographic chart with a strong bias toward the presentation of essential safety information.

Bathymetric surveys
See also
Hydrographic/nautical chart – Topographic map of a maritime area and adjacent coastal regions
General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans – Publicly available bathymetric chart of the world's oceans
List of map projections

References
External links
Bathymetric Data Viewer from NOAA's NCEI
3-D Bathymetric Chart Activity: An introduction to the Nautical Chart
"The very earliest rendition of a bathymetric map of an oceanic basin. Matthew Fontaine Maury published this map in 1853 in his book  "Explanations and Sailing Directions to Accompany the Wind and Current Charts ...." NOAA Photo Library.
General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO)
USGS Bathymetric Surveys
History of Bathymetry and Bathymetric Charts Archived 2019-12-17 at the Wayback Machine
Web Based Bathymetry viewer for North America, Europe and Australia

================================================================================

# Bathymetry

Bathymetry is the study of underwater depth of ocean floors (seabed topography), river floors, or lake floors. In other words, bathymetry is the underwater equivalent to hypsometry or topography. The first recorded evidence of water depth measurements are from Ancient Egypt over 3000 years ago. Bathymetry has various uses including the production of bathymetric charts to guide vessels and identify underwater hazards, the study of marine life near the floor of water bodies, coastline analysis and ocean dynamics, including predicting currents and tides.
Bathymetric charts (not to be confused with hydrographic charts), are typically produced to support safety of surface or sub-surface navigation, and usually show seafloor relief or terrain as contour lines (called depth contours or isobaths) and selected depths (soundings), and typically also provide surface navigational information.  Bathymetric maps (a more general term where navigational safety is not a concern) may also use a digital terrain model and artificial illumination techniques to illustrate the depths being portrayed. The global bathymetry is sometimes combined with topography data to yield a global relief model. Paleobathymetry is the study of past underwater depths.
Synonyms include seafloor mapping, seabed mapping, seafloor imaging and seabed imaging. Bathymetric measurements are conducted with various methods, from depth sounding, sonar and lidar techniques, to buoys and satellite altimetry. Various methods have advantages and disadvantages and the specific method used depends upon the scale of the area under study, financial means, desired measurement accuracy, and additional variables. Despite modern computer-based research, the ocean seabed in many locations is less measured than the topography of Mars.

Seabed topography
Measurement
Originally, bathymetry involved the measurement of ocean depth through depth sounding. Early techniques used pre-measured heavy rope or cable lowered over a ship's side. This technique measures the depth at one point at a time, and is therefore less efficient than other methods. It is also subject to movements of the ship and currents moving the line out of true, and thus is also less accurate.
The data used to make bathymetric maps today typically comes from an echosounder (sonar) mounted beneath or over the side of a boat, "pinging" a beam of sound downward at the seafloor or from remote sensing LIDAR or LADAR systems. The amount of time it takes for the sound or light to travel through the water, bounce off the seafloor, and return to the sounder informs the equipment of the distance to the seafloor. LIDAR/LADAR surveys are usually conducted by airborne systems.

Starting in the early 1930s, single-beam sounders were used to make bathymetry maps. Today, multibeam echosounders (MBES) are typically used, which use hundreds of very narrow adjacent beams (typically 256) arranged in a fan-like swath of typically 90 to 170 degrees across. The tightly packed array of narrow individual beams provides very high angular resolution and accuracy. In general, a wide swath, which is depth dependent, allows a boat to map more seafloor in less time than a single-beam echosounder by making fewer passes. The beams update many times per second (typically 0.1–50 Hz depending on water depth), allowing faster boat speed while maintaining 100% coverage of the seafloor.  Attitude sensors allow for the correction of the boat's roll and pitch on the ocean surface, and a gyrocompass provides accurate heading information to correct for vessel yaw.  (Most modern MBES systems use an integrated motion-sensor and position system that measures yaw as well as the other dynamics and position.) A satellite-based global navigation system positions the soundings with respect to the surface of the earth. Sound speed profiles (speed of sound in water as a function of depth) of the water column correct for refraction or "ray-bending" of the sound waves owing to non-uniform water column characteristics such as temperature, conductivity, and pressure. A computer system processes all the data, correcting for all of the above factors as well as for the angle of each individual beam.  The resulting sounding measurements are then processed either manually, semi-automatically or automatically (in limited circumstances) to produce a map of the area.  As of 2010 a number of different outputs are generated, including a sub-set of the original measurements that satisfy some conditions (e.g., most representative likely soundings, shallowest in a region, etc.) or integrated digital terrain models (DTM) (e.g., a regular or irregular grid of points connected into a surface). Historically, selection of measurements was more common in hydrographic applications while DTM construction was used for engineering surveys, geology, flow modeling, etc.  Since c. 2003–2005, DTMs have become more accepted in hydrographic practice.
Satellites are also used to measure bathymetry. Satellite radar maps deep-sea topography by detecting the subtle variations in sea level caused by the gravitational pull of undersea mountains, ridges, and other masses. On average, sea level is higher over mountains and ridges than over abyssal plains and trenches.
In the United States the United States Army Corps of Engineers performs or commissions most surveys of navigable inland waterways, while the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) performs the same role for ocean waterways.  Coastal bathymetry data is available from NOAA's National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC), which is now merged into National Centers for Environmental Information.  Bathymetric data is usually referenced to tidal vertical datums.  For deep-water bathymetry, this is typically Mean Sea Level (MSL), but most data used for nautical charting is referenced to Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW) in American surveys, and Lowest Astronomical Tide (LAT) in other countries.  Many other datums are used in practice, depending on the locality and tidal regime.
Occupations or careers related to bathymetry include the study of oceans and rocks and minerals on the ocean floor, and the study of underwater earthquakes or volcanoes.  The taking and analysis of bathymetric measurements is one of the core areas of modern hydrography, and a fundamental component in ensuring the safe transport of goods worldwide.

Satellite imagery
Another form of mapping the seafloor is through the use of satellites. The satellites are equipped with hyper-spectral and multi-spectral sensors which are used to provide constant streams of images of coastal areas providing a more feasible method of visualising the bottom of the seabed.

Hyper-spectral sensors
The data-sets produced by hyper-spectral (HS) sensors tend to range between 100 and 200 spectral bands of approximately 5–10 nm bandwidths. Hyper-spectral sensing, or imaging spectroscopy, is a combination of continuous remote imaging and spectroscopy producing a single set of data. Two examples of this kind of sensing are AVIRIS (airborne visible/infrared imaging spectrometer) and HYPERION.
The application of HS sensors in regards to the imaging of the seafloor is the detection and monitoring of chlorophyll, phytoplankton, salinity, water quality, dissolved organic materials, and suspended sediments. However, this does not provide a great visual interpretation of coastal environments.

Multi-spectral sensors
The other method of satellite imaging, multi-spectral (MS) imaging, tends to divide the EM spectrum into a small number of bands, unlike its partner hyper-spectral sensors which can capture a much larger number of spectral bands.
MS sensing is used more in the mapping of the seabed due to its fewer spectral bands with relatively larger bandwidths. The larger bandwidths allow for a larger spectral coverage, which is crucial in the visual detection of marine features and general spectral resolution of the images acquired.

Airborne laser bathymetry
High-density airborne laser bathymetry (ALB) is a modern, highly technical, approach to the mapping the seafloor. First developed in the 1960s and 1970s, ALB is a "light detection and ranging (LiDAR) technique that uses visible, ultraviolet, and near infrared light to optically remote sense a contour target through both an active and passive system." This means that airborne laser bathymetry also uses light outside the visible spectrum to detect curves in the underwater landscape.
LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) is, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,  "a remote sensing method that uses light in the form of a pulsed laser to measure distances". These light pulses, along with other data, generate a three-dimensional representation of whatever the light pulses reflect off, giving an accurate representation of the surface characteristics. A LiDAR system usually consists of a laser, scanner, and GPS receiver. Airplanes and helicopters are the most commonly used platforms for acquiring LIDAR data over broad areas. One application of LiDAR is bathymetric LiDAR, which uses water-penetrating green light to also measure seafloor and riverbed elevations.
ALB generally operates in the form of a pulse of non-visible light being emitted from a low-flying aircraft and a receiver recording two reflections from the water. The first of which originates from the surface of the water, and the second from the seabed. This method has been used in a number of studies to map segments of the seafloor of various coastal areas.

Examples of commercial LIDAR bathymetry systems
There are various LIDAR bathymetry systems that are commercially accessible. Two of these systems are the Scanning Hydrographic Operational Airborne Lidar Survey (SHOALS) and the Laser Airborne Depth Sounder (LADS). SHOALS was first developed to help the United States Army Corps of Engineers in bathymetric surveying by a company called Optech in the 1990s. SHOALS is done through the transmission of a laser, of wavelength between 530 and 532 nm, from a height of approximately 200 m at speed of 60 m/s on average.

High resolution orthoimagery
High resolution orthoimagery (HRO) is the process of creating an image that combines the geometric qualities with the characteristics of photographs. The result of this process is an orthoimage, a scale image which includes corrections made for feature displacement such as building tilt. These corrections are made through the use of a mathematical equation, information on sensor calibration, and the application of digital elevation models.
An orthoimage can be created through the combination of a number of photos of the same target. The target is photographed from a number of different angles to allow for the perception of the true elevation and tilting of the object. This gives the viewer an accurate perception of the target area.
High resolution orthoimagery is currently being used in the 'terrestrial mapping program', the aim of which is to 'produce high resolution topography data from Oregon to Mexico'. The orthoimagery will be used to provide the photographic data for these regions.

History
The earliest known depth measurements were made about 1800 BCE by Egyptians by probing with a pole. Later a weighted line was used, with depths marked off at intervals. This process was known as sounding. Both these methods were limited by being spot depths, taken at a point, and could easily miss significant variations in the immediate vicinity. Accuracy was also affected by water movement–current could swing the weight from the vertical and both depth and position would be affected. This was a laborious and time-consuming process and was strongly affected by weather and sea conditions.
There were significant improvements with the voyage of HMS Challenger in the 1870s, when similar systems using wires and a winch were used for measuring much greater depths than previously possible, but this remained a one depth at a time procedure which required very low speed for accuracy. Greater depths could be measured using weighted wires deployed and recovered by powered winches. The wires had less drag and were less affected by current, did not stretch as much, and were strong enough to support their own weight to considerable depths. The winches allowed faster deployment and recovery, necessary when the depths measured were of several kilometers. Wire drag surveys continued to be used until the 1990s due to reliability and accuracy. This procedure involved towing a cable by two boats, supported by floats and weighted to keep a constant depth The wire would snag on obstacles shallower than the cable depth. This was very useful for finding navigational hazards which could be missed by soundings, but was limited to relatively shallow depths.
Single-beam echo sounders were used from the 1920s-1930s to measure the distance of the seafloor directly below a vessel at relatively close intervals along the line of travel. By running roughly parallel lines, data points could be collected at better resolution, but this method still left gaps between the data points, particularly between the lines. The mapping of the sea floor started by using sound waves, contoured into isobaths and early bathymetric charts of shelf topography. These provided the first insight into seafloor morphology, though mistakes were made due to horizontal positional accuracy and imprecise depths. Sidescan sonar was developed in the 1950s to 1970s and could be used to create an image of the bottom, but the technology lacked the capacity for direct depth measurement across the width of the scan. In 1957, Marie Tharp, working with Bruce Charles Heezen, created the first three-dimensional physiographic map of the world's ocean basins. Tharp's discovery was made at the perfect time. It was one of many discoveries that took place near the same time as the invention of the computer. Computers, with their ability to compute large quantities of data, have made research much easier, include the research of the world's oceans. The development of multibeam systems made it possible to obtain depth information across the width of the sonar swath, to higher resolutions, and with precise position and attitude data for the transducers, made it possible to get multiple high resolution soundings from a single pass.
The US Naval Oceanographic Office developed a classified version of multibeam technology in the 1960s. NOAA obtained  an unclassified commercial version in the late 1970s and established protocols and standards. Data acquired with multibeam sonar have vastly increased understanding of the seafloor.
The U.S. Landsat satellites of the 1970s and later the European Sentinel satellites, have provided new ways to find bathymetric information, which can be derived from satellite images. These methods include making use of the different depths to which different frequencies of light penetrate the water.  When water is clear and the seafloor is sufficiently reflective, depth can be estimated by measuring the amount of reflectance observed by a satellite and then modeling how far the light should penetrate in the known conditions. The Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System (ATLAS) on NASA's Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite 2 (ICESat-2) is a photon-counting lidar that uses the return time of laser light pulses from the Earth's surface to calculate altitude of the surface. ICESat-2 measurements can be combined with ship-based sonar data to fill in gaps and improve precision of maps of shallow water.
Mapping of continental shelf seafloor topography using remotely sensed data has applied a variety of methods to visualise the bottom topography. Early methods included hachure maps, and were generally based on the cartographer's personal interpretation of limited available data. Acoustic mapping methods developed from military sonar images produced a more vivid picture of the seafloor. Further development of sonar based technology have allowed more detail and greater resolution, and ground penetrating techniques provide information on what lies below the bottom surface. Airborne and satellite data acquisition have made further advances possible in visualisation of underwater surfaces: high-resolution aerial photography and orthoimagery is a powerful tool for mapping shallow clear waters on continental shelves, and airborne laser bathymetry, using reflected light pulses, is also very effective in those conditions, and hyperspectral and multispectral satellite sensors can provide a nearly constant stream of benthic environmental information. Remote sensing techniques have been used to develop new ways of visualizing dynamic benthic environments from general geomorphological features to biological coverage.

Charts
See also
Acoustic seabed classification – Partitioning of a seabed acoustic image into discrete physical entities or classes
Bathometer – Tool for measuring water depth
Bathymetric chart – Map depicting the submerged terrain of bodies of water
Coastal morphodynamics – Interaction of shoreline seafloor topography and fluid hydrodynamic processes
Depth gauge – Instrument that indicates depth below a reference surface
General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans – Publicly available bathymetric chart of the world's oceans
Global relief model – Model of Earth's relief including elevation and depth underwater
Hydrographic survey – Science of measurement and description of features which affect maritime activities
Ocean surface topography – Shape of the ocean surface relative to the geoid
Seabed – Bottom of the ocean
Terrain – Dimension and shape of land surfaces
Thalweg – Line of lowest elevation in a watercourse or valley

References
External links

Bathymetric Data Viewer from NOAA's NCEI
Overview for underwater terrain, data formats, etc. (vterrain.org)
High resolution bathymetry for the Great Barrier Reef and Coral Sea
A.PO.MA.B.-Academy of Positioning Marine and Bathymetry
WebMapping Application for searching free and open source Bathymetry datasets
Interactive Web Map, Set Negative Elevation for Bathymetry
NOAA Ocean Explorer
Schmidt Ocean Institute: Seafloor Mapping
Coastal Bathymetry Map for US, Canda, Europe & Australia
Seabed 2030 Archived 2019-06-16 at the Wayback Machine

================================================================================

# World Ocean Circulation Experiment

The World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) was a component of the international World Climate Research Program, and aimed to establish the role of the World Ocean in the Earth's climate system. WOCE's field phase ran between 1990 and 1998, and was followed by an analysis and modeling phase that ran until 2002. When the WOCE was conceived, there were three main motivations for its creation.  The first of these is the inadequate coverage of the World Ocean, specifically in the Southern Hemisphere. Data was also much more sparse during the winter months than the summer months, and there was—and still is to some extent—a critical need for data covering all seasons.  Secondly, the data that did exist was not initially collected for studying ocean circulation and was not well suited for model comparison. Lastly, there were concerns involving the accuracy and reliability of some measurements. The WOCE was meant to address these problems by providing new data collected in ways designed to "meet the needs of global circulation models for climate prediction."

Goals
Two major goals were set for the campaign.

1. Develop ocean models that can be used in climate models and collect the data necessary for testing them
Specifically, understand: 

Large scale fluxes of heat and fresh water
Dynamical balance of World Ocean circulation
Components of ocean variability on months to years
The rates and nature of formation, ventilation and circulation of water masses that influence the climate system on time scales from ten to one hundred years 
In order to achieve Goal 1, the WCRP outlined and established Core Projects that would receive priority. The first of these was the "Global Description" project, which was meant to obtain data on the circulation of heat, fresh water and chemicals, as well as the statistics of eddies.  The second project—"Southern Ocean"—placed particular emphasis on studying the Antarctic Circumpolar Current and the Southern Ocean’s interaction with the World Ocean. The third and final Core Project serving goal one was the "Gyre Dynamics Experiment." The second and third of these focuses are designed specifically to address the ocean’s role in decadal climate changes.  Initial planning of the WOCE states that achievement of Goal 1 would involve "strong interaction between modeling and field activities," which are described further below.

2. Find the representativeness of the dataset for long-term behavior and find methods for determining long-term changes in ocean currents
Specifically: 

Determine representative of specific WOCE data sets
Identify those oceanographic parameters, indices and fields that are essential for continuing measurements in a climate observing system on decadal time scales
Develop cost effective techniques suitable for deployment in an ongoing climate observing system

Modeling
Models in WOCE were used for both experimental design and data analysis. Models with use of data can incorporate various properties, including thermal wind balance, maintenance of the barotropic vorticity budget, and conservation of heat, fresh water, or mass. Measurements useful for these parameters are heat, fresh water or tracer concentration; current, surface fluxes of heat and fresh water; sea surface elevation.
Both inverse modeling and data assimilation were employed during WOCE. Inverse modeling is the fitting of data using a numerical least squares or maximum likelihood fitting procedure. The data assimilation technique requires data to be compared with an initial integration of a model. The model is then progressed in time using new data and repeating the process.
The success of these methods requires sufficient data to fully constrain the model, hence the need for a comprehensive field program.

Field Program
Goals for the WOCE Field Program were as follows. 

The experiment will be global in nature and the major observational components will be deployed in all oceans.
The requirement of simultaneity of measurements will be imposed only where essential.
The flexibility inherent in the existing arrangements for cooperative research in the worldwide oceanographic (and meteorological) community will be exploited as far as possible.
Major elements of the WOCE Field Program  

Satellite Altimetry
plans built around the availability of ERS–1 and ERS–2 (European), TOPEX/POSEIDON (US/French) to study fields of surface forcing and oceanic surface topography  
Hydrography
high quality conductivity-temperature-pressure profilers as well as free-fall instruments to provide a climatological temperature-salinity database 
Geochemical Tracers
using chemical information (such as radioactive decay and atmospheric history) of passive compounds to study the formation rates and transport of water masses on climatological timescales
Ocean Surface Fluxes
using in-situ and satellite measurements to quantify fluxes of heat, water and momentum (necessary for modeling thermohaline and wind-driven circulation)
Satellite Winds
using surface buoys, Voluntary Observing Ships (VOS) and satellite microwave scatterometer systems to measure the surface wind field
Surface Meteorological Observations from VOS
improvement of sampling and accuracy in surface meteorological measurements, as well increasing area coverage
Upper Ocean Observations from Merchant Ships-of-Opportunity
expendable bathythermograph (XBT) sampling lines to study changes in heat content of the upper ocean
In-Situ Sea Level Measurements
upgrading and installing new sea-level gauges to calibrate altimetry measurements
Drifting Buoys and Floats
surface drifting buoys provide measurements such as sea level pressure, sea-surface temperature, humidity, precipitation, surface salinity, and near-surface and mid-depth currents
Moored instrumentation
provides detailed temporal information at a number of sites and depths

Resulting Conclusions
This list, though not comprehensive, outlines a sampling of the most highly cited articles and books resulting from the WOCE.

Ganachaud, Alexandre; Wunsch, Carl (23 November 2000). "Improved estimates of global ocean circulation, heat transport and mixing from hydrographic data". Nature. 408 (6811): 453–457. Bibcode:2000Natur.408..453G. doi:10.1038/35044048. PMID 11100723. S2CID 4416105.
Ocean Circulation and Climate, Observing and Modelling the Global Ocean, 1st Edition, Eds. Gerold Siedler, John Gould & John Church, Academic Press, 736pp. (International Geophysics Series 77) 2001
Stammer, D. (2003). "Volume, heat, and freshwater transports of the global ocean circulation 1993–2000, estimated from a general circulation model constrained by World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) data" (PDF). Journal of Geophysical Research. 108 (C1): 3007. Bibcode:2003JGRC..108.3007S. doi:10.1029/2001JC001115. hdl:11858/00-001M-0000-0014-3AA4-A.
Ganachaud, Alexandre (2003). "Large-scale mass transports, water mass formation, and diffusivities estimated from World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) hydrographic data". Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans. 108 (C7): 3213. Bibcode:2003JGRC..108.3213G. doi:10.1029/2002JC001565.
Ganachaud, Alexandre; Wunsch, Carl (December 2002). "Oceanic nutrient and oxygen transports and bounds on export production during the World Ocean Circulation Experiment: NUTRIENT AND OXYGEN TRANSPORTS FROM WOCE". Global Biogeochemical Cycles. 16 (4): 5–1–5–14. doi:10.1029/2000GB001333. S2CID 15462518.
Revisiting the South Pacific subtropical circulation: A synthesis of World Ocean Circulation Experiment observations along 32°S,     S. E. Wijffels, J. M. Toole, R. Davis,     Journal of Geophysical Research, September 2012

See also
Geochemical Ocean Sections Study (GEOSECS)
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project (GLODAP)
World Ocean Atlas (WOA)

External links
Access page to the WOCE data legacy at the National Oceanographic Data Center (US)
Electronic Atlas of WOCE Data at the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven
WOCE page at the Wayback Machine (archived 2009-04-17) at the National Oceanography Centre, Southampton (UK)
Searchable set of WOCE data, archived in the information system PANGAEA
WOCE observations 1990–1998; a summary of the WOCE global data resource, WOCE International Project Office, WOCE Report No. 179/02., Southampton, UK. (pdf 18.9 MB)

== References ==

================================================================================

# Southern Ocean

The Southern Ocean, also known as the Antarctic Ocean, comprises the southernmost waters of the world ocean, generally taken to be south of 60° S latitude and encircling Antarctica. With a size of 21,960,000 km2 (8,480,000 sq mi), it is the second-smallest of the five principal oceanic divisions, smaller than the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans, and larger than the Arctic Ocean. 
The maximum depth of the Southern Ocean, using the definition that it lies south of 60th parallel, was surveyed by the Five Deeps Expedition in early February 2019. The expedition's multibeam sonar team identified the deepest point at 60° 28' 46"S, 025° 32' 32"W, with a depth of 7,434 metres (24,390 ft). The expedition leader and chief submersible pilot, Victor Vescovo, has proposed naming this deepest point the "Factorian Deep", based on the name of the crewed submersible DSV Limiting Factor, in which he successfully visited the bottom for the first time on February 3, 2019.
By way of his voyages in the 1770s, James Cook proved that waters encompassed the southern latitudes of the globe. Yet, geographers have often disagreed on whether the Southern Ocean should be defined as a body of water bound by the seasonally fluctuating Antarctic Convergence — an oceanic zone where cold, northward flowing waters from the Antarctic mix with warmer Subantarctic waters — or not defined at all, with its waters instead treated as the southern limits of the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian oceans. The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) finally settled the debate after the full importance of Southern Ocean overturning circulation had been ascertained, and the term Southern Ocean now defines the body of water which lies south of the northern limit of that circulation. 
The Southern Ocean overturning circulation is important because it makes up the second half of the global thermohaline circulation, after the better known Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC). Much like AMOC, it has also been substantially affected by climate change, in ways that have increased ocean stratification, and which may also result in the circulation substantially slowing or even passing a tipping point and collapsing outright. The latter would have adverse impacts on global weather and the function of marine ecosystems here, unfolding over centuries. The ongoing warming is already changing marine ecosystems here.

Definition and term use
Borders and names for oceans and seas were internationally agreed when the International Hydrographic Bureau, the precursor to the IHO, convened the First International Conference on 24 July 1919. The IHO then published these in its Limits of Oceans and Seas, the first edition being 1928. Since the first edition, the limits of the Southern Ocean have moved progressively southward; since 1953, it has been omitted from the official publication and left to local hydrographic offices to determine their own limits.
The IHO included the ocean and its definition as the waters south of the 60th parallel south in its 2000 revisions, but this has not been formally adopted, due to continuing impasses about some of the content, such as the naming dispute over the Sea of Japan. The 2000 IHO definition was circulated as a draft edition in 2002, and is used by some within the IHO and other organizations, such as the CIA World Factbook and Merriam-Webster.
The Australian Government regards the Southern Ocean as lying immediately south of Australia (see § Australian standpoint).
The National Geographic Society recognized the ocean officially in June 2021. Prior to this, it depicted it in a typeface different from the other world oceans; instead, it showed the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans extending to Antarctica on both its print and online maps. Map publishers using the term Southern Ocean on their maps include Hema Maps and GeoNova.

Pre-20th century
"Southern Ocean" is an obsolete name for the Pacific Ocean or South Pacific, coined by the Spanish explorer Vasco Núñez de Balboa, the first European to discover the Pacific, who approached it from the north in Panama. The "South Seas" is a less archaic synonym. A 1745 British Act of Parliament established a prize for discovering a Northwest Passage to "the Western and Southern Ocean of America".
Authors using "Southern Ocean" to name the waters encircling the unknown southern polar regions used varying limits. James Cook's account of his second voyage implies New Caledonia borders it. Peacock's 1795 Geographical Dictionary said it lay "to the southward of America and Africa"; John Payne in 1796 used 40 degrees as the northern limit; the 1827 Edinburgh Gazetteer used 50 degrees. The Family Magazine in 1835 divided the "Great Southern Ocean" into the "Southern Ocean" and the "Antarctick [sic] Ocean" along the Antarctic Circle, with the northern limit of the Southern Ocean being lines joining Cape Horn, the Cape of Good Hope, Van Diemen's Land and the south of New Zealand.
The United Kingdom's South Australia Act 1834 described the waters forming the southern limit of the new province of South Australia as "the Southern Ocean". The Colony of Victoria's Legislative Council Act 1881 delimited part of the division of Bairnsdale as "along the New South Wales boundary to the Southern ocean".

1928 delineation
In the 1928 first edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas, the Southern Ocean was delineated by land-based limits: Antarctica to the south, and South America, Africa, Australia, and Broughton Island, New Zealand to the north.
The detailed land-limits used were from Cape Horn in Chile eastward to Cape Agulhas in Africa, then further eastward to the southern coast of mainland Australia to Cape Leeuwin, Western Australia. From Cape Leeuwin, the limit then followed eastward along the coast of mainland Australia to Cape Otway, Victoria, then southward across Bass Strait to Cape Wickham, King Island, along the west coast of King Island, then the remainder of the way south across Bass Strait to Cape Grim, Tasmania.
The limit then followed the west coast of Tasmania southward to the South East Cape and then went eastward to Broughton Island, New Zealand, before returning to Cape Horn.

1937 delineation
The northern limits of the Southern Ocean were moved southward in the IHO's 1937 second edition of the Limits of Oceans and Seas. From this edition, much of the ocean's northern limit ceased to abut land masses.
In the second edition, the Southern Ocean then extended from Antarctica northward to latitude 40°S between Cape Agulhas in Africa (long. 20°E) and Cape Leeuwin in Western Australia (long. 115°E), and extended to latitude 55°S between Auckland Island of New Zealand (165 or 166°E east) and Cape Horn in South America (67°W).
As is discussed in more detail below, prior to the 2002 edition the limits of oceans explicitly excluded the seas lying within each of them. The Great Australian Bight was unnamed in the 1928 edition, and delineated as shown in the figure above in the 1937 edition. It therefore encompassed former Southern Ocean waters—as designated in 1928—but was technically not inside any of the three adjacent oceans by 1937.
In the 2002 draft edition, the IHO have designated "seas" as subdivisions within "oceans", so the Bight would have still been within the Southern Ocean in 1937 if the 2002 convention were in place then. To perform direct comparisons of current and former limits of oceans it is necessary to consider, or at least be aware of, how the 2002 change in IHO terminology for "seas" can affect the comparison.

1953 delineation
The Southern Ocean did not appear in the 1953 third edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas, a note in the publication read:

The Antarctic or Southern Ocean has been omitted from this publication as the majority of opinions received since the issue of the 2nd Edition in 1937 are to the effect that there exists no real justification for applying the term Ocean to this body of water, the northern limits of which are difficult to lay down owing to their seasonal change. The limits of the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans have therefore been extended South to the Antarctic Continent.Hydrographic Offices who issue separate publications dealing with this area are therefore left to decide their own northern limits (Great Britain uses Latitude of 55 South.)
Instead, in the IHO 1953 publication, the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans were extended southward, the Indian and Pacific Oceans (which had not previously touched pre 1953, as per the first and second editions) now abutted at the meridian of South East Cape, and the southern limits of the Great Australian Bight and the Tasman Sea were moved northward.

2002 draft delineation
The IHO readdressed the question of the Southern Ocean in a survey in 2000. Of its 68 member nations, 28 responded, and all responding members except Argentina agreed to redefine the ocean, reflecting the importance placed by oceanographers on ocean currents. The proposal for the name Southern Ocean won 18 votes, beating the alternative Antarctic Ocean. Half of the votes supported a definition of the ocean's northern limit at the 60th parallel south—with no land interruptions at this latitude—with the other 14 votes cast for other definitions, mostly the 50th parallel south, but a few for as far north as the 35th parallel south. Notably, the Southern Ocean Observing System collates data from latitudes higher than 40 degrees south.
A draft fourth edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas was circulated to IHO member states in August 2002 (sometimes referred to as the "2000 edition" as it summarized the progress to 2000). It has yet to be published due to 'areas of concern' by several countries relating to various naming issues around the world – primarily the Sea of Japan naming dispute – and there have been various changes: 60 seas were given new names, and even the name of the publication was changed. A reservation had also been lodged by Australia regarding the Southern Ocean limits. Effectively, the third edition—which did not delineate the Southern Ocean leaving delineation to local hydrographic offices—has yet to be superseded.

Despite this, the fourth edition definition has partial de facto usage by many nations, scientists, and organisations such as the U.S. (the CIA World Factbook uses "Southern Ocean", but none of the other new sea names within the "Southern Ocean", such as the "Cosmonauts Sea") and Merriam-Webster, scientists and nations – and even by some within the IHO. Some nations' hydrographic offices have defined their own boundaries; the United Kingdom used the 55th parallel south for example. Other organisations favour more northerly limits for the Southern Ocean. For example, Encyclopædia Britannica describes the Southern Ocean as extending as far north as South America, and confers great significance on the Antarctic Convergence, yet its description of the Indian Ocean contradicts this, describing the Indian Ocean as extending south to Antarctica.
Other sources, such as the National Geographic Society, show the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans as extending to Antarctica on its maps, although articles on the National Geographic web site have begun to reference the Southern Ocean.
A radical shift from past IHO practices (1928–1953) was also seen in the 2002 draft edition when the IHO delineated "seas" as subdivisions within the boundaries of "oceans". While the IHO are often considered the authority for such conventions, the shift brought them into line with the practices of other publications (e.g. the CIA World Fact Book) which already adopted the principle that seas are contained within oceans. This difference in practice is markedly seen for the Pacific Ocean in the adjacent figure. Thus, for example, previously the Tasman Sea between Australia and New Zealand was not regarded by the IHO as part of the Pacific, but as of the 2002 draft edition it is.
The new delineation of seas as subdivisions of oceans has avoided the need to interrupt the northern boundary of the Southern Ocean where intersected by Drake Passage which includes all of the waters from South America to the Antarctic coast, nor interrupt it for the Scotia Sea, which also extends below the 60th parallel south. The new delineation of seas has also meant that the long-time named seas around Antarctica, excluded from the 1953 edition (the 1953 map did not even extend that far south), are automatically part of the Southern Ocean.

Australian standpoint
In Australia, cartographical authorities define the Southern Ocean as including the entire body of water between Antarctica and the south coasts of Australia and New Zealand, and up to 60°S elsewhere. Coastal maps of Tasmania and South Australia label the sea areas as Southern Ocean and Cape Leeuwin in Western Australia is described as the point where the Indian and Southern Oceans meet.

History of exploration
Unknown southern land
Exploration of the Southern Ocean was inspired by a belief in the existence of a Terra Australis – a vast continent in the far south of the globe to "balance" the northern lands of Eurasia and North Africa – which had existed since the times of Ptolemy. The rounding of the Cape of Good Hope in 1487 by Bartolomeu Dias first brought explorers within touch of the Antarctic cold, and proved that there was an ocean separating Africa from any Antarctic land that might exist. Ferdinand Magellan, who passed through the Strait of Magellan in 1520, assumed that the islands of Tierra del Fuego to the south were an extension of this unknown southern land. In 1564, Abraham Ortelius published his first map, Typus Orbis Terrarum, an eight-leaved wall map of the world, on which he identified the Regio Patalis with Locach as a northward extension of the Terra Australis, reaching as far as New Guinea.
European geographers continued to connect the coast of Tierra del Fuego with the coast of New Guinea on their globes, and allowing their imaginations to run riot in the vast unknown spaces of the south Atlantic, south Indian and Pacific oceans they sketched the outlines of the Terra Australis Incognita ("Unknown Southern Land"), a vast continent stretching in parts into the tropics. The search for this great south land was a leading motive of explorers in the 16th and the early part of the 17th centuries.
The Spaniard Gabriel de Castilla, who claimed having sighted "snow-covered mountains" beyond the 64° S in 1603, is recognized as the first explorer that discovered the continent of Antarctica, although he was ignored in his time.
In 1606, Pedro Fernández de Quirós took possession for the king of Spain all of the lands he had discovered in Australia del Espiritu Santo (the New Hebrides) and those he would discover "even to the Pole".
Francis Drake, like Spanish explorers before him, had speculated that there might be an open channel south of Tierra del Fuego. When Willem Schouten and Jacob Le Maire discovered the southern extremity of Tierra del Fuego and named it Cape Horn in 1615, they proved that the Tierra del Fuego archipelago was of small extent and not connected to the southern land, as previously thought. Subsequently, in 1642, Abel Tasman showed that even New Holland (Australia) was separated by sea from any continuous southern continent.

South of the Antarctic Convergence
The visit to South Georgia by Anthony de la Roché in 1675 was the first-ever discovery of land south of the Antarctic Convergence, i.e. in the Southern Ocean/Antarctic. Soon after the voyage cartographers started to depict "Roché Island", honouring the discoverer. James Cook was aware of la Roché's discovery when surveying and mapping the island in 1775.
Edmond Halley's voyage in HMS Paramour for magnetic investigations in the South Atlantic met the pack ice in 52° S in January 1700, but that latitude (he reached 140 mi [230 km] off the north coast of South Georgia) was his farthest south. A determined effort on the part of the French naval officer Jean-Baptiste Charles Bouvet de Lozier to discover the "South Land" – described by a half legendary "sieur de Gonneyville" – resulted in the discovery of Bouvet Island in 54°10′ S, and in the navigation of 48° of longitude of ice-cumbered sea nearly in 55° S in 1730.
In 1771, Yves Joseph Kerguelen sailed from France with instructions to proceed south from Mauritius in search of "a very large continent".  He lighted upon a land in 50° S which he called South France, and believed to be the central mass of the southern continent. He was sent out again to complete the exploration of the new land, and found it to be only an inhospitable island which he renamed the Isle of Desolation, but which was ultimately named after him.

South of the Antarctic Circle
The obsession of the undiscovered continent culminated in the brain of Alexander Dalrymple, the brilliant and erratic hydrographer who was nominated by the Royal Society to command the Transit of Venus expedition to Tahiti in 1769. The command of the expedition was given by the admiralty to Captain James Cook. Sailing in 1772 with Resolution, a vessel of 462 tons under his own command and Adventure of 336 tons under Captain Tobias Furneaux, Cook first searched in vain for Bouvet Island, then sailed for 20 degrees of longitude to the westward in latitude 58° S, and then 30° eastward for the most part south of 60° S, a lower southern latitude than had ever been voluntarily entered before by any vessel. On 17 January 1773 the Antarctic Circle was crossed for the first time in history and the two ships reached 67° 15' S by 39° 35' E, where their course was stopped by ice.

Cook then turned northward to look for French Southern and Antarctic Lands, of the discovery of which he had received news at Cape Town, but from the rough determination of his longitude by Kerguelen, Cook reached the assigned latitude 10° too far east and did not see it. He turned south again and was stopped by ice in 61° 52′ S by 95° E and continued eastward nearly on the parallel of 60° S to 147° E. On 16 March, the approaching winter drove him northward for rest to New Zealand and the tropical islands of the Pacific. In November 1773, Cook left New Zealand, having parted company with the Adventure, and reached 60° S by 177° W, whence he sailed eastward keeping as far south as the floating ice allowed. The Antarctic Circle was crossed on 20 December and Cook remained south of it for three days, compelled after reaching 67° 31′ S to stand north again in 135° W.
A long detour to 47° 50′ S served to show that there was no land connection between New Zealand and Tierra del Fuego. Turning south again, Cook crossed the Antarctic Circle for the third time at 109° 30′ W before his progress was once again blocked by ice four days later at 71° 10′ S by 106° 54′ W. This point, reached on 30 January 1774, was the farthest south attained in the 18th century. With a great detour to the east, almost to the coast of South America, the expedition regained Tahiti for refreshment. In November 1774, Cook started from New Zealand and crossed the South Pacific without sighting land between 53° and 57° S to Tierra del Fuego; then, passing Cape Horn on 29 December, he rediscovered Roché Island renaming it Isle of Georgia, and discovered the South Sandwich Islands (named Sandwich Land by him), the only ice-clad land he had seen, before crossing the South Atlantic to the Cape of Good Hope between 55° and 60°. He thereby laid open the way for future Antarctic exploration by exploding the myth of a habitable southern continent. Cook's most southerly discovery of land lay on the temperate side of the 60th parallel, and he convinced himself that if land lay farther south it was practically inaccessible and without economic value.
Voyagers rounding Cape Horn frequently met with contrary winds and were driven southward into snowy skies and ice-encumbered seas; but so far as can be ascertained none of them before 1770 reached the Antarctic Circle, or knew it, if they did.
In a voyage from 1822 to 1824, James Weddell commanded the 160-ton brig Jane, accompanied by his second ship Beaufoy captained by Matthew Brisbane. Together they sailed to the South Orkneys where sealing proved disappointing. They turned south in the hope of finding a better sealing ground. The season was unusually mild and tranquil, and on 20 February 1823 the two ships reached latitude 74°15' S and longitude 34°16'45″ W the southernmost position any ship had ever reached up to that time. A few icebergs were sighted but there was still no sight of land, leading Weddell to theorize that the sea continued as far as the South Pole. Another two days' sailing would have brought him to Coat's Land (to the east of the Weddell Sea) but Weddell decided to turn back.

First sighting of land
The first land south of the parallel 60° south latitude was discovered by the Englishman William Smith, who sighted Livingston Island on 19 February 1819. A few months later Smith returned to explore the other islands of the South Shetlands archipelago, landed on King George Island, and claimed the new territories for Britain.
In the meantime, the Spanish Navy ship San Telmo sank in September 1819 when trying to cross Cape Horn. Parts of her wreckage were found months later by sealers on the north coast of Livingston Island (South Shetlands). It is unknown if some survivor managed to be the first to set foot on these Antarctic islands.
The first confirmed sighting of mainland Antarctica cannot be accurately attributed to one single person. It can be narrowed down to three individuals. According to various sources, three men all sighted the ice shelf or the continent within days or months of each other: Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen, a captain in the Russian Imperial Navy; Edward Bransfield, a captain in the Royal Navy; and Nathaniel Palmer, an American sailor out of Stonington, Connecticut. It is certain that the expedition, led by von Bellingshausen and Lazarev on the ships Vostok and Mirny, reached a point within 32 km (20 mi) from Princess Martha Coast and recorded the sight of an ice shelf at 69°21′28″S 2°14′50″W that became known as the Fimbul Ice Shelf. On 30 January 1820, Bransfield sighted Trinity Peninsula, the northernmost point of the Antarctic mainland, while Palmer sighted the mainland in the area south of Trinity Peninsula in November 1820. Von Bellingshausen's expedition also discovered Peter I Island and Alexander I Island, the first islands to be discovered south of the circle.

Antarctic expeditions
In December 1839, as part of the United States Exploring Expedition of 1838–42 conducted by the United States Navy (sometimes called "the Wilkes Expedition"), an expedition sailed from Sydney, Australia, on the sloops-of-war USS Vincennes and USS Peacock, the brig USS Porpoise, the full-rigged ship Relief, and two schooners Sea Gull and USS Flying Fish. They sailed into the Antarctic Ocean, as it was then known, and reported the discovery "of an Antarctic continent west of the Balleny Islands" on 25 January 1840. That part of Antarctica was later named "Wilkes Land", a name it maintains to this day.
Explorer James Clark Ross passed through what is now known as the Ross Sea and discovered Ross Island (both of which were named for him) in 1841. He sailed along a huge wall of ice that was later named the Ross Ice Shelf. Mount Erebus and Mount Terror are named after two ships from his expedition: HMS Erebus and HMS Terror.

The Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1914, led by Ernest Shackleton, set out to cross the continent via the pole, but their ship, Endurance, was trapped and crushed by pack ice before they even landed. The expedition members survived after an epic journey on sledges over pack ice to Elephant Island. Then Shackleton and five others crossed the Southern Ocean, in an open boat called James Caird, and then trekked over South Georgia to raise the alarm at the whaling station Grytviken.
In 1946, US Navy Rear Admiral Richard E. Byrd and more than 4,700 military personnel visited the Antarctic in an expedition called Operation Highjump. Reported to the public as a scientific mission, the details were kept secret and it may have actually been a training or testing mission for the military. The expedition was, in both military or scientific planning terms, put together very quickly. The group contained an unusually high amount of military equipment, including an aircraft carrier, submarines, military support ships, assault troops and military vehicles. The expedition was planned to last for eight months but was unexpectedly terminated after only two months. With the exception of some eccentric entries in Admiral Byrd's diaries, no real explanation for the early termination has ever been officially given.
Captain Finn Ronne, Byrd's executive officer, returned to Antarctica with his own expedition in 1947–1948, with Navy support, three planes, and dogs. He disproved the notion that the continent was divided in two and established that East and West Antarctica was one single continent, i.e. that the Weddell Sea and the Ross Sea are not connected.  The expedition explored and mapped large parts of Palmer Land and the Weddell Sea coastline, and identified the Ronne Ice Shelf, named by him for his wife Jackie Ronne. He covered 3,600 miles (5,790 km) by ski and dog sled – more than any other explorer in history. The Ronne Antarctic Research Expedition discovered and mapped the last unknown coastline in the world and was the first Antarctic expedition to ever include women.

Post-Antarctic Treaty
The Antarctic Treaty was signed on 1 December 1959 and came into force on 23 June 1961. Among other provisions, this treaty limits military activity in the Antarctic to the support of scientific research.
The first person to sail single-handed to Antarctica was the New Zealander David Henry Lewis, in 1972, in a 10-metre (30 ft) steel sloop Ice Bird.
A baby, named Emilio Marcos de Palma, was born near Hope Bay on 7 January 1978, becoming the first baby born on the continent. He also was born further south than anyone in history.
The MV Explorer was a cruise ship operated by the Swedish explorer Lars-Eric Lindblad. Observers point to Explorer's 1969 expeditionary cruise to Antarctica as the frontrunner for today's sea-based tourism in that region. Explorer was the first cruise ship used specifically to sail the icy waters of the Antarctic Ocean and the first to sink there when she struck an unidentified submerged object on 23 November 2007, reported to be ice, which caused a 10 by 4 inches (25 by 10 cm) gash in the hull. Explorer was abandoned in the early hours of 23 November 2007 after taking on water near the South Shetland Islands in the Southern Ocean, an area which is usually stormy but was calm at the time. Explorer was confirmed by the Chilean Navy to have sunk at approximately position: 62° 24′ South, 57° 16′ West, in roughly 600 m of water.
British engineer Richard Jenkins designed an unmanned saildrone that completed the first autonomous circumnavigation of the Southern Ocean on 3 August 2019 after 196 days at sea.
The first completely human-powered expedition on the Southern Ocean was accomplished on 25 December 2019 by a team of rowers comprising captain Fiann Paul (Iceland), first mate Colin O'Brady (US), Andrew Towne (US), Cameron Bellamy (South Africa), Jamie Douglas-Hamilton (UK) and John Petersen (US).

Geography
The Southern Ocean, geologically the youngest of the oceans, was formed when Antarctica and South America moved apart, opening the Drake Passage, roughly 30 million years ago. The separation of the continents allowed the formation of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current.
With a northern limit at 60°S, the Southern Ocean differs from the other oceans in that its largest boundary, the northern boundary, does not abut a landmass (as it did with the first edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas). Instead, the northern limit is with the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans.
One reason for considering it as a separate ocean stems from the fact that much of the water of the Southern Ocean differs from the water in the other oceans. Water gets transported around the Southern Ocean fairly rapidly because of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current which circulates around Antarctica. Water in the Southern Ocean south of, for example, New Zealand, resembles the water in the Southern Ocean south of South America more closely than it resembles the water in the Pacific Ocean.
The Southern Ocean has typical depths of between 4,000 and 5,000 m (13,000 and 16,000 ft) over most of its extent with only limited areas of shallow water. The Southern Ocean's greatest depth of 7,236 m (23,740 ft) occurs at the southern end of the South Sandwich Trench, at 60°00'S, 024°W. The Antarctic continental shelf appears generally narrow and unusually deep, its edge lying at depths up to 800 m (2,600 ft), compared to a global mean of 133 m (436 ft).
Equinox to equinox in line with the sun's seasonal influence, the Antarctic ice pack fluctuates from an average minimum of 2.6 million square kilometres (1.0×10^6 sq mi) in March to about 18.8 million square kilometres (7.3×10^6 sq mi) in September, more than a sevenfold increase in area.

Subdivisions
Subdivisions of oceans are geographical features such as "seas", "straits", "bays", "channels", and "gulfs". There are many sudivisions of the Southern Ocean defined in the never-approved 2002 draft fourth edition of the IHO publication Limits of Oceans and Seas. In clockwise order these include (with sector):

Weddell Sea (57°18'W – 12°16'E)
King Haakon VII Sea (20°W – 45°E)
Lazarev Sea (0° – 14°E)
Riiser-Larsen Sea (14° – 30°E)
Cosmonauts Sea (30° – 50°E)
Cooperation Sea (59°34' – 85°E)
Davis Sea (82° – 96°E)
Mawson Sea (95°45' – 113°E)
Dumont D'Urville Sea (140°E)
Somov Sea (150° – 170°E)
Ross Sea (166°E – 155°W)
Amundsen Sea (102°20′ – 126°W)
Bellingshausen Sea (57°18' – 102°20'W)
Part of the Drake Passage (54° – 68°W)
Bransfield Strait (54° – 62°W)
Part of the Scotia Sea (26°30' – 65°W)
A number of these such as the 2002 Russian-proposed "Cosmonauts Sea", "Cooperation Sea", and "Somov (mid-1950s Russian polar explorer) Sea" are not included in the 1953 IHO document which remains currently in force, because they received their names largely originated from 1962 onward. Leading geographic authorities and atlases do not use these latter three names, including the 2014 10th edition World Atlas from the United States' National Geographic Society and the 2014 12th edition of the British Times Atlas of the World, but Soviet and Russian-issued maps do.

Biggest seas
Top large seas:

Natural resources
The Southern Ocean probably contains large, and possibly giant, oil and gas fields on the continental margin. Placer deposits, accumulation of valuable minerals such as gold, formed by gravity separation during sedimentary processes are also expected to exist in the Southern Ocean.
Manganese nodules are expected to exist in the Southern Ocean. Manganese nodules are rock concretions on the sea bottom formed of concentric layers of iron and manganese hydroxides around a core. The core may be microscopically small and is sometimes completely transformed into manganese minerals by crystallization. Interest in the potential exploitation of polymetallic nodules generated a great deal of activity among prospective mining consortia in the 1960s and 1970s.
The icebergs that form each year around in the Southern Ocean hold enough fresh water to meet the needs of every person on Earth for several months. For several decades there have been proposals, none yet to be feasible or successful, to tow Southern Ocean icebergs to more arid northern regions (such as Australia) where they can be harvested.

Natural hazards
Icebergs can occur at any time of year throughout the ocean. Some may have drafts up to several hundred meters; smaller icebergs, iceberg fragments and sea-ice (generally 0.5 to 1 m thick) also pose problems for ships. The deep continental shelf has a floor of glacial deposits varying widely over short distances.
Sailors know latitudes from 40 to 70 degrees south as the "Roaring Forties", "Furious Fifties" and "Shrieking Sixties" due to high winds and large waves that form as winds blow around the entire globe unimpeded by any land-mass. Icebergs, especially in May to October, make the area even more dangerous. The remoteness of the region makes sources of search and rescue scarce.

Physical oceanography
Antarctic Circumpolar Current and Antarctic Convergence
While the Southern is the second smallest ocean it contains the unique and highly energetic Antarctic Circumpolar Current which moves perpetually eastward –  chasing and joining itself, and at 21,000 km (13,000 mi) in length – it comprises the world's longest ocean current, transporting 130 million cubic metres per second (4.6×10^9 cu ft/s) of water – 100 times the flow of all the world's rivers.
Several processes operate along the coast of Antarctica to produce, in the Southern Ocean, types of water masses not produced elsewhere in the oceans of the Southern Hemisphere. One of these is the Antarctic Bottom Water, a very cold, highly saline, dense water that forms under sea ice. Another is Circumpolar Deep Water,  a mixture of Antarctic Bottom Water and North Atlantic Deep Water.
Associated with the Circumpolar Current is the Antarctic Convergence encircling Antarctica, where cold northward-flowing Antarctic waters meet the relatively warmer waters of the subantarctic, Antarctic waters predominantly sink beneath subantarctic waters, while associated zones of mixing and upwelling create a zone very high in nutrients. These nurture high levels of phytoplankton with associated copepods and Antarctic krill, and resultant foodchains supporting fish, whales, seals, penguins, albatrosses and a wealth of other species.
The Antarctic Convergence is considered to be the best natural definition of the northern extent of the Southern Ocean.

Upwelling
Large-scale upwelling is found in the Southern Ocean. Strong westerly (eastward) winds blow around Antarctica, driving a significant flow of water northward. This is actually a type of coastal upwelling. Since there are no continents in a band of open latitudes between South America and the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula, some of this water is drawn up from great depths. In many numerical models and observational syntheses, the Southern Ocean upwelling represents the primary means by which deep dense water is brought to the surface. Shallower, wind-driven upwelling is also found off the west coasts of North and South America, northwest and southwest Africa, and southwest and southeast Australia, all associated with oceanic subtropical high pressure circulations.

Ross and Weddell gyres
The Ross Gyre and Weddell Gyre are two gyres that exist within the Southern Ocean. The gyres are located in the Ross Sea and Weddell Sea respectively, and both rotate clockwise. The gyres are formed by interactions between the Antarctic Circumpolar Current and the Antarctic Continental Shelf.
Sea ice has been noted to persist in the central area of the Ross Gyre. There is some evidence that global warming has resulted in some decrease of the salinity of the waters of the Ross Gyre since the 1950s.
Due to the Coriolis effect acting to the left in the Southern Hemisphere and the resulting Ekman transport away from the centres of the Weddell Gyre, these regions are very productive due to upwelling of cold, nutrient rich water.

Observation
Observation of the Southern Ocean is coordinated through the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS). This provides access to meta data for a significant proportion of the data collected in the regions over the past decades including hydrographic measurements and ocean currents.  The data provision is set up to emphasize records that are related to Essential Ocean Variables (EOVs) for the ocean region south of 40°S.

Climate
Sea temperatures vary from about −2 to 10 °C (28 to 50 °F). Cyclonic storms travel eastward around the continent and frequently become intense because of the temperature contrast between ice and open ocean. The ocean from about latitude 40 south to the Antarctic Circle has the strongest average winds found anywhere on Earth. In winter the ocean freezes outward to 65 degrees south latitude in the Pacific sector and 55 degrees south latitude in the Atlantic sector, lowering surface temperatures well below 0 degrees Celsius. At some coastal points, persistent intense drainage winds from the interior keep the shoreline ice-free throughout the winter.

Change
Biodiversity
Animals
A variety of marine animals exist and rely, directly or indirectly, on the phytoplankton in the Southern Ocean. Antarctic sea life includes penguins, blue whales, orcas, colossal squids and fur seals. The emperor penguin is the only penguin that breeds during the winter in Antarctica, while the Adélie penguin breeds farther south than any other penguin. The rockhopper penguin has distinctive feathers around the eyes, giving the appearance of elaborate eyelashes. King penguins, chinstrap penguins, and gentoo penguins also breed in the Antarctic.
The Antarctic fur seal was very heavily hunted in the 18th and 19th centuries for its pelt by sealers from the United States and the United Kingdom. The Weddell seal, a "true seal", is named after Sir James Weddell, commander of British sealing expeditions in the Weddell Sea. Antarctic krill, which congregates in large schools, is the keystone species of the ecosystem of the Southern Ocean, and is an important food organism for whales, seals, leopard seals, fur seals, squid, icefish, penguins, albatrosses and many other birds.
The benthic communities of the seafloor are diverse and dense, with up to 155,000 animals found in 1 square metre (10.8 sq ft). As the seafloor environment is very similar all around the Antarctic, hundreds of species can be found all the way around the mainland, which is a uniquely wide distribution for such a large community. Deep-sea gigantism is common among these animals.
A census of sea life carried out during the International Polar Year and which involved some 500 researchers was released in 2010. The research is part of the global Census of Marine Life (CoML) and has disclosed some remarkable findings. More than 235 marine organisms live in both polar regions, having bridged the gap of 12,000 km (7,500 mi). Large animals such as some cetaceans and birds make the round trip annually. More surprising are small forms of life such as mudworms, sea cucumbers and free-swimming snails found in both polar oceans. Various factors may aid in their distribution – fairly uniform temperatures of the deep ocean at the poles and the equator which differ by no more than 5 °C (9.0 °F), and the major current systems or marine conveyor belt which transport egg and larva stages. Among smaller marine animals generally assumed to be the same in the Antarctica and the Arctic, more detailed studies of each population have often—but not always—revealed differences, showing that they are closely related cryptic species rather than a single bipolar species.

Birds
The rocky shores of mainland Antarctica and its offshore islands provide nesting space for over 100 million birds every spring. These nesters include species of albatrosses, petrels, skuas, gulls and terns. The insectivorous South Georgia pipit is endemic to South Georgia and some smaller surrounding islands. Freshwater ducks inhabit South Georgia and the Kerguelen Islands.
The flightless penguins are all located in the Southern Hemisphere, with the greatest concentration located on and around Antarctica. Four of the 18 penguin species live and breed on the mainland and its close offshore islands. Another four species live on the subantarctic islands. Emperor penguins have four overlapping layers of feathers, keeping them warm. They are the only Antarctic animal to breed during the winter.

Fish
There are relatively few fish species in few families in the Southern Ocean. The most species-rich family are the snailfish (Liparidae), followed by the cod icefish (Nototheniidae) and eelpout (Zoarcidae). Together the snailfish, eelpouts and notothenioids (which includes cod icefish and several other families) account for almost 9⁄10 of the more than 320 described fish species of the Southern Ocean (tens of undescribed species also occur in the region, especially among the snailfish). Southern Ocean snailfish are generally found in deep waters, while the icefish also occur in shallower waters.

Icefish
Cod icefish (Nototheniidae), as well as several other families, are part of the Notothenioidei suborder, collectively sometimes referred to as icefish. The suborder contains many species with antifreeze proteins in their blood and tissue, allowing them to live in water that is around or slightly below 0 °C (32 °F). Antifreeze proteins are also known from Southern Ocean snailfish.
The crocodile icefish (family Channichthyidae), also known as white-blooded fish, are only found in the Southern Ocean. They lack hemoglobin in their blood, resulting in their blood being colourless. One Channichthyidae species, the mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), was once the most common fish in coastal waters less than 400 metres (1,312 ft) deep, but was overfished in the 1970s and 1980s. Schools of icefish spend the day at the seafloor and the night higher in the water column eating plankton and smaller fish.
There are two species from the genus Dissostichus, the Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus mawsoni) and the Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides). These two species live on the seafloor 100–3,000 metres (328–9,843 ft) deep, and can grow to around 2 metres (7 ft) long weighing up to 100 kilograms (220 lb), living up to 45 years. The Antarctic toothfish lives close to the Antarctic mainland, whereas the Patagonian toothfish lives in the relatively warmer subantarctic waters. Toothfish are commercially fished, and overfishing has reduced toothfish populations.
Another abundant fish group is the genus Notothenia, which like the Antarctic toothfish have antifreeze in their bodies.
An unusual species of icefish is the Antarctic silverfish (Pleuragramma antarcticum), which is the only truly pelagic fish in the waters near Antarctica.

Mammals
Seven pinniped species inhabit Antarctica. The largest, the elephant seal (Mirounga leonina), can reach up to 4,000 kilograms (8,818 lb), while females of the smallest, the Antarctic fur seal (Arctophoca gazella), reach only 150 kilograms (331 lb). These two species live north of the sea ice, and breed in harems on beaches. The other four species can live on the sea ice. Crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) and Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) form breeding colonies, whereas leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) and Ross seals (Ommatophoca rossii) live solitary lives. Although these species hunt underwater, they breed on land or ice and spend a great deal of time there, as they have no terrestrial predators.
The four species that inhabit sea ice are thought to make up 50% of the total biomass of the world's seals. Crabeater seals have a population of around 15 million, making them one of the most numerous large animals on the planet. The New Zealand sea lion (Phocarctos hookeri), one of the rarest and most localised pinnipeds, breeds almost exclusively on the subantarctic Auckland Islands, although historically it had a wider range. Out of all permanent mammalian residents, the Weddell seals live the furthest south.
There are 10 cetacean species found in the Southern Ocean: six baleen whales, and four toothed whales. The largest of these, the blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus), grows to 24 metres (79 ft) long weighing 84 tonnes. Many of these species are migratory, and travel to tropical waters during the Antarctic winter.

Invertebrates
Arthropods
Five species of krill, small free-swimming crustaceans, have been found in the Southern Ocean. The Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) is one of the most abundant animal species on earth, with a biomass of around 500 million tonnes. Each individual is 6 centimetres (2.4 in) long and weighs over 1 gram (0.035 oz).  The swarms that form can stretch for kilometres, with up to 30,000 individuals per 1 cubic metre (35 cu ft), turning the water red. Swarms usually remain in deep water during the day, ascending during the night to feed on plankton. Many larger animals depend on krill for their own survival. During the winter when food is scarce, adult Antarctic krill can revert to a smaller juvenile stage, using their own body as nutrition.
Many benthic crustaceans have a non-seasonal breeding cycle, and some raise their young in a brood pouch. Glyptonotus antarcticus is an unusually large benthic isopod, reaching 20 centimetres (8 in) in length weighing 70 grams (2.47 oz). Amphipods are abundant in soft sediments, eating a range of items, from algae to other animals. The amphipods are highly diverse with more than 600 recognized species found south of the Antarctic Convergence and there are indications that many undescribed species remain. Among these are several "giants", such as the iconic epimeriids that are up to 8 cm (3.1 in) long.
Slow moving sea spiders are common, sometimes growing as large as a human hand. They feed on the corals, sponges, and bryozoans that litter the seabed.

Molluscs, urchins, squid and sponges
Many aquatic molluscs are present in Antarctica. Bivalves such as Adamussium colbecki move around on the seafloor, while others such as Laternula elliptica live in burrows filtering the water above.
There are around 70 cephalopod species in the Southern Ocean, the largest of which is the colossal squid (Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni), which at up to 14 metres (46 ft) is among the largest invertebrate in the world. Squid makes up most of the diet of some animals, such as grey-headed albatrosses and sperm whales, and the warty squid (Moroteuthis ingens) is one of the subantarctic's most preyed upon species by vertebrates.
The sea urchin genus Abatus burrow through the sediment eating the nutrients they find in it. Two species of salps are common in Antarctic waters: Salpa thompsoni and Ihlea racovitzai. Salpa thompsoni is found in ice-free areas, whereas Ihlea racovitzai is found in the high-latitude areas near ice. Due to their low nutritional value, they are normally only eaten by fish, with larger animals such as birds and marine mammals only eating them when other food is scarce.
Antarctic sponges are long-lived and sensitive to environmental changes due to the specificity of the symbiotic microbial communities within them. As a result, they function as indicators of environmental health.

Environment
Increased solar ultraviolet radiation resulting from the Antarctic ozone hole has reduced marine primary productivity (phytoplankton) by as much as 15% and has started damaging the DNA of some fish. Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, especially the landing of an estimated five to six times more Patagonian toothfish than the regulated fishery, likely affects the sustainability of the stock. Long-line fishing for toothfish causes a high incidence of seabird mortality.

International agreements
All international agreements regarding the world's oceans apply to the Southern Ocean. It is also subject to several regional agreements:
The Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) prohibits commercial whaling south of 40 degrees south (south of 60 degrees south between 50 degrees and 130 degrees west). Japan regularly does not recognize this provision, because the sanctuary violates IWC charter. Since the scope of the sanctuary is limited to commercial whaling, in regard to its whaling permit and whaling for scientific research, a Japanese fleet carried out an annual whale-hunt in the region. On 31 March 2014, the International Court of Justice ruled that Japan's whaling program, which Japan has long claimed is for scientific purposes, was a cloak for commercial whaling, and no further permits would be granted.
The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals is part of the Antarctic Treaty System. It was signed at the conclusion of a multilateral conference in London on 11 February 1972.
The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources  is part of the Antarctic Treaty System. It entered into force on 7 April 1982 with a goal to preserve marine life and environmental integrity in and near Antarctica. It was established largely due to concerns that an increase in krill catches in the Southern Ocean could seriously impact populations of other marine life which are dependent upon krill for food.
Many nations prohibit the exploration for and the exploitation of mineral resources south of the fluctuating Antarctic Convergence, which lies in the middle of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current and serves as the dividing line between the very cold polar surface waters to the south and the warmer waters to the north. The Antarctic Treaty covers the portion of the globe south of 60 degrees south; it prohibits new claims to Antarctica.
The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources applies to the area south of 60° South latitude as well as the areas further north up to the limit of the Antarctic Convergence.

Economy
Between 1 July 1998 and 30 June 1999, fisheries landed 119,898 tonnes (118,004 long tons; 132,165 short tons), of which 85% consisted of krill and 14% of Patagonian toothfish. International agreements came into force in late 1999 to reduce illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, which in the 1998–99 season landed five to six times more Patagonian toothfish than the regulated fishery.

Ports and harbors
Major operational ports include: Rothera Station, Palmer Station, Villa Las Estrellas, Esperanza Base, Mawson Station, McMurdo Station, and offshore anchorages in Antarctica.
Few ports or harbors exist on the southern (Antarctic) coast of the Southern Ocean, since ice conditions limit use of most shores to short periods in midsummer; even then some require icebreaker escort for access. Most Antarctic ports are operated by government research stations and, except in an emergency, remain closed to commercial or private vessels; vessels in any port south of 60 degrees south are subject to inspection by Antarctic Treaty observers.
The Southern Ocean's southernmost port operates at McMurdo Station at 77°50′S 166°40′E. Winter Quarters Bay forms a small harbor, on the southern tip of Ross Island where a floating ice pier makes port operations possible in summer. Operation Deep Freeze personnel constructed the first ice pier at McMurdo in 1973.
Based on the original 1928 IHO delineation of the Southern Ocean (and the 1937 delineation if the Great Australian Bight is considered integral), Australian ports and harbors between Cape Leeuwin and Cape Otway on the Australian mainland and along the west coast of Tasmania would also be identified as ports and harbors existing in the Southern Ocean. These would include the larger ports and harbors of Albany, Thevenard, Port Lincoln, Whyalla, Port Augusta, Port Adelaide, Portland, Warrnambool, and Macquarie Harbour.

Even though organizers of several yacht races define their routes as involving the Southern Ocean, the actual routes don't enter the actual geographical boundaries of the Southern Ocean. The routes involve instead South Atlantic, South Pacific and Indian Ocean.

See also
Borders of the oceans
List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands
List of countries by southernmost point
List of seamounts in the Southern Ocean
Seven Seas
International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean

Notes
References
Baynes, T. S., ed. (1878), "Antarctic Ocean" , Encyclopædia Britannica, vol. 2 (9th ed.), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, p. 100
Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911), "Great Southern Ocean" , Encyclopædia Britannica, vol. 12 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, p. 422
Brindley, David, ed. (2014), "Antarctic Ocean, Austral Ocean, Southern Ocean", Style Manual, Washington: National Geographic Society, retrieved 31 July 2015.

Further reading
Arndt, Jan Erik; Schenke, Hans Werner; et al. (20 June 2013). "The International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean (IBCSO) Version 1.0—A new bathymetric compilation covering circum-Antarctic waters" (PDF). Geophysical Research Letters. 40 (12). American Geophysical Union (AGU): 3111–3117. Bibcode:2013GeoRL..40.3111A. doi:10.1002/grl.50413. ISSN 0094-8276. S2CID 210009232.
Gille, Sarah T. (15 February 2002). "Warming of the Southern Ocean Since the 1950s". Science. 295 (5558). American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS): 1275–1277. Bibcode:2002Sci...295.1275G. doi:10.1126/science.1065863. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 11847337. S2CID 31434936.
Tchernia, P. (1980). Descriptive Regional Oceanography. Oxford: Pergamon. ISBN 978-0-08-020919-7.
Matthias Tomczak and J. Stuart Godfrey. 2003. Regional Oceanography: an Introduction. (see the site)

External links

The CIA World Factbook's entry on the Southern Ocean
The Fifth Ocean Archived 6 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine from Geography.About.com
International Hydrographic Organization (IHO): Limits of Oceans and Seas (2nd Edition), extant 1937 to 1953, with limits of Southern Ocean.
NOAA FAQ about the number of oceans
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources

================================================================================

# ABC News (Australia)

ABC News, also known as ABC News and Current Affairs, is a public news service produced by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. The service covers both local and world affairs, broadcasting both nationally as ABC News, and across the Asia-Pacific under the ABC Australia title.
The division of the organisation ABC News, Analysis and Investigations is responsible for all news-gathering and coverage across the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's various television, radio, and online platforms. Some of the services included under the auspices of the division are its 24-hour news channel ABC News Australia TV Channel (formerly ABC News 24), the long-running radio news programs, AM, The World Today, and PM; ABC NewsRadio, a 24-hour continuous news radio channel; and radio news bulletins and programs on ABC Local Radio, ABC Radio National, ABC Classic FM, and Triple J.
ABC News Online has an extensive online presence which includes many written news reports and videos available via ABC Online, an ABC News mobile app (ABC Listen), podcasts, and in addition, all of the ABC News television programs available via the video-on-demand platform, ABC iview. As of 2021, the ABC News website includes ABC Sport, ABC Health, ABC Science, ABC Arts & Culture, ABC Fact Check, ABC Environment, and news in other languages.
Justin Stevens was appointed director of the division on 4 April 2022.

History
ABC News, from its inception in 1932, with ABC radio sourced its news from multiple sources, including cable news from London, its own bureaus in Europe, the Middle East, Greece and the Asia-Pacific, and in a fashion similar to commercial radio stations from local newspapers around Australia. 
Censorship was rife during the war, particularly after the U.S. entered the conflict on 7 December 1941. After General Douglas MacArthur set up his headquarters in Australia, he wielded enormous power, including on matters of censorship. Inter alia, he declared that every Australian radio station would only broadcast three news bulletins per day and that these would be simultaneous on all stations (ABC and commercial) at 7.45 a.m., midday, and 7.00 p.m. Weather forecasts were banned because it was felt that these may assist the enemy.
The 7:45 a.m. bulletin was the only one that did not commence on the hour or the half-hour. It was placed at this timeslot as initially the ABC sourced its news from newspapers in a deal which required that news would not be broadcast earlier, to ensure newspapers sales were not effected. This bulletin continued at this time on ABC Local Radio stations until 19 September 2020, before being cancelled to save costs.
Notices were issued banning radio stations from broadcasting some major wartime events, but as the federal government did not have the same power over the printed press as it did over the radio, newspapers usually reported events that radio was not permitted to mention.
The ABC launched its first independent news bulletin on 1 June 1947 after years of negotiations with the Australian Government.
The Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983 mandates that the ABC "shall develop and maintain an independent service for the broadcasting of news and information" both within Australia on a daily basis, and also to countries outside Australia.
The name of the division and director responsible has changed over the years. In 2004 it was the News and Current Affairs Division when John Cameron took over as Director from Max Uechtritz as Director.  The financial year 2008–2009 saw a lot of changes, both in the way that television content was produced as well as an "expansion of international news programming and continuous news across platforms, new programs and a range of appointments to senior positions". Kate Torney became director of the News Division in April 2009.
In November 2014, a cut of A$254 million to funding over the following five years meant that the ABC would have to shed about 10% of its total staff, around 400 people. There were several programming changes, with regional and local programming losing out to national programs, and the Adelaide TV production studio had to close apart from the news and current affairs section.
In late 2015 Gaven Morris was appointed Director of the News Division.
The ABC announced in November 2016 that their 24-hour television news channel ABC News 24 and ABC NewsRadio would be rebranded under the ABC News division with an updated logo, commencing on 10 April 2017. The ABC announced on that day that ABC News 24 and ABC NewsRadio were both called ABC NEWS, with a new logo and visual branding. They would be distinguished by context or by descriptors, such as "the ABC News channel" for TV and "ABC News on radio" for radio. Social media accounts would be merged.
The Director's role changed its name to Director, News, Analysis & Investigations in 2017–2018, and as of June 2021 Morris was still in the role. During the 2017 to 2018 financial year, the ABC launched "Regional Connecting Communities" program, which provided funding for increased jobs in the regions, as well as more resources for local news, weather and live reporting.
Justin Stevens was appointed director of the division of ABC News, Analysis and Investigations on 31 March 2022.
Media executive and producer Kimberly Lynton "Kim" Williams AM was appointed chair of ABC News on 7 March 2024, with the term expected to conclude on 6 March 2029.

Functions
The division is responsible for all news-gathering and production of news output for ABC television, the ABC network of radio stations, and for its online services. In 2018 it was estimated that online ABC news and current affairs reached about 4.8 million users in Australia each month. As of 2021, the ABC News website includes ABC Sport, ABC Health, ABC Science, ABC Arts & Culture, ABC Fact Check, ABC Environment and news in other languages.

Theme music
The news theme used from the first days of ABC television from November 1956 to 1985 was "Majestic Fanfare", composed by Charles Williams. From 1956 until the early 1980s the version used was the abridged version performed by the Queen's Hall Light Orchestra, from a recording made in 1943. Each bulletin opened with a clip from the top story of the day, with the title "ABC News" superimposed over the footage. Later, this on-screen approach was replaced by a generic graphic title sequence. In 1982, to celebrate the ABC's 50th anniversary, a new version of the theme was commissioned, which incorporated both orchestral and new electronic elements.
With the exception of a period in the mid-1980s, during which a synthesised theme ("Best Endeavours", written by Alan Hawkshaw, which was the theme for Channel 4 News in the UK) was used for around a year, this was used on radio until August 1988, and on television until early 1985. A reworking of "Majestic Fanfare" (essentially the original orchestration up one tone) was arranged by Richard Mills and recorded in 1988 by the Sydney Symphony Orchestra.
From 1985, a theme composed by Tony Ansell and Peter Wall was used for 20 years, even after the 1998 brand refresh. In 2010, it was sampled and remixed by the group Pendulum and this revised work went on to be placed #11 on the Triple J Hottest 100 chart on Australia Day 2011.
The theme for ABC News changed on Australia Day (26 January) 2005, to a piece written by Martin Armiger and John Gray, and for a couple of years it bore a resemblance to the original Peter Wall / Tony Ansell work in the opening signature notes. Wall challenged the ABC and was successful in reaching an agreement. The opening notes were removed and the work was re-arranged in 2010. The theme music from the 2005–2010 era was remixed by Armiger, giving it a more upbeat, synthesised feel.
On 1 July 2022, ABC News used the 1985–2005 theme during the ABC's 90th Anniversary.
That theme, by Wall and Ansell, was remixed from the original multi-track studio recording and re-introduced to news bulletins on 19 August 2024, which was tweaked on 28 July 2025 with less prominent morse code beeps and a fuller orchestral sound.

Television
History
On 4 March 1985, the ABC refreshed its structure and look, when the 7 o'clock news and the following current affairs program (at that time, Nationwide) were combined to form The National, and moved to 6:30 pm until 8 December 1985. After The National was deemed unsuccessful, On 9 December 1985, the news was refreshed again with a new set, graphics, and theme.
In 1998, the set was updated, a new opener featuring a light blue globe and the ABC logo was introduced, and the theme remained the same but was tweaked. The graphics also changed to match the new look.

On Australia Day (26 January) 2005, a new look (along with theme music) was introduced. The new look made use of an orange and blue globe motif. At the same time the set and graphics received a major overhaul to fit in with this look. This package was used until 21 July 2010, a day before the launch of ABC News.
In January 2010, the ABC announced that a dedicated 24-hour digital television news channel, named ABC News 24 would be launched during the year. The new channel commenced preliminary broadcasting with a promo loop in early July 2010, with the ABC re-numbering ABC HD channel 20 to logical channel number 24. The channel was officially launched as ABC News 24 at 7:30 pm Australian Eastern Standard Time on 22 July 2010, and simulcast its first hour of transmission on ABC1.
With the launch of ABC News on 22 July 2010, all 7 pm bulletins across Australia had a graphics overhaul to match the look of the new channel. The blue/orange globe style opener was replaced with a series of sliding panels, featuring images specific to each state. New sets were built in each capital city studio to match the ABC News 24 set and graphics were changed to match.

ABC News channel
The news bulletins such as News Breakfast, ABC News Mornings, ABC News at Noon, ABC News Day, ABC News Afternoons, The World, ABC Late News and Weekend Breakfast are aired on ABC News along with its own 30- and 15-minute hourly bulletins.

National bulletins and programs
National news updates are presented on ABC TV throughout the day, with evening updates at 7 pm presented live in most states by the respective state news presenters. Bulletins focus strongly on issues of state relevance, with a greater inclusion of national and international news items than are found in the news bulletins of commercial broadcasters. A national financial bulletin is presented on weeknights by Alan Kohler in Melbourne.  The ABC's Ultimo studios produces the 8:30 pm weeknight update presented by Joe O'Brien.
News Breakfast is broadcast on weekdays from 6 am – 9 am on ABC TV and the ABC News channel from ABC's Melbourne studio and is presented by James Glenday and Bridget Brennan, news presenter Emma Rebellato, sport presenter Catherine Murphy and weather presenter Nate Byrne. The program is also shown online and on ABC Australia in the Asia Pacific region.
Weekend Breakfast is broadcast on weekends from 7 am – 11 am on ABC TV and the ABC News channel from ABC's main national news studio in Sydney at Ultimo and is presented by Johanna Nicholson and Fauziah Ibrahim.
ABC News Mornings is presented by Gemma Veness and Dan Bourchier (from the ABC's Parramatta Studio in Parramatta, Western Sydney) and airs weekdays at 9 am on ABC TV and on the ABC News channel. Sport is presented by Catherine Murphy and weather is presented by Nate Byrne, both from the Melbourne studios.
ABC News at Noon (launched in February 2005 to replace the less successful Midday News and Business, preceded in turn by the long-running World at Noon) is presented by Ros Childs (weekdays) and Dan Bourchier (weekends) from the ABC's main national news studio in the Sydney suburb of Ultimo, and airs on ABC TV and ABC News channel in each Australian state and territory at midday Australian Eastern Standard/Daylight Time. A separate edition of the bulletin is produced for Western Australia two to three hours after the original broadcast, as the time delay was deemed too long to remain up-to-date.
7.30 is presented by Sarah Ferguson from the ABC's main national news studio in parramatta , Sydney on ABC TV at 7:30 pm, weeknights. However, when a big state political event happens, the national program can be pre-empted by the local edition.
ABC Late News is presented by Michael Tetlow (Monday-Friday), broadcast from Perth on ABC TV at 10:30 pm (eastern time). A separate edition is presented from Perth for Western Australia also by Michael Tetlow on ABC at 10:30 pm (western time) and then ABC News channel at 11pm (eastern time) and 12:30 am. Later, they also host 15-minute News Overnight bulletins.
Other news and current affairs programs broadcast nationally include Afternoon Briefing, ABC News at Five, 7.30, Insiders, Four Corners, Behind the News, Q&A, Landline, Offsiders, One Plus One, The Business, The World, Australian Story, Foreign Correspondent, Media Watch and Australia Wide.

State bulletins
ABC News ACT is presented from the ABC's Dickson studio by Greg Jennett from Sunday to Thursday and Adrienne Francis on Friday and Saturday.
ABC News New South Wales is presented from the ABC's Parramatta studio (ABN) by Jeremy Fernandez from Sunday to Thursday and Lydia Feng and Nakari Thorpe on Friday and Saturday. Weather is presented by Tom Saunders on weeknights.
ABC News Northern Territory is presented from the ABC's Darwin studio (ABD) by Kyle Dowling from Sunday to Thursday and Isabella Tolhurst on Friday and Saturday.
ABC News Queensland is presented from the ABC's Queensland headquarters (ABQ) on Brisbane's South Bank by Jessica van Vonderen from Monday to Thursday and Lexy Hamilton-Smith from Friday to Sunday. Weather is presented by Jenny Woodward from Sunday to Thursday.
ABC News South Australia is presented from the ABC's Collinswood studio (ABS) by Jessica Harmsen from Monday to Thursday and Richard Davies or Candice Prosser from Friday to Sunday.
ABC News Tasmania is presented from the ABC's Hobart studio (ABT) by Guy Stayner on weeknights and Alexandra Alvaro on weekends.
ABC News Victoria is presented from ABC Victoria's Southbank studio (ABV) by Tamara Oudyn from Sunday to Thursday and Iskhandar Razak on Friday and Saturday. Weather is presented by Dr Adam Morgan from Monday to Thursday.
ABC News Western Australia is presented from ABC WA's East Perth studio by Pamela Medlen from Monday to Thursday and Charlotte Hamlyn from Friday to Sunday.

ABC Australia
News and current affairs programs are also broadcast on ABC Australia, a channel broadcast to the region outside Australia. These include Four Corners, 7:30 and Q+A.

Online
ABC news television programs are available via the video-on-demand platform, ABC iview.

Radio
ABC NewsRadio is a radio station dedicated to news and current affairs. It features national news bulletins at :00 and :30, with rolling news coverage during the remainder of each hour. In off-peak hours, it broadcasts content from partner providers such as the BBC World Service, NPR, and Deutsche Welle.
ABC Radio Australia, which covers the Asia-Pacific region, broadcasts regular bulletins produced in Melbourne, featuring reports from foreign correspondents in the region.

National bulletins
ABC Classic FM broadcasts state bulletins every hour from 6 am until noon and then every 2 hours on the hour.
Non-local streams of ABC Radio National broadcast national bulletins every hour, 24 hours a day.
National youth radio station triple j broadcasts its own bulletins between 6:00 am and 6:00 pm on weekdays, and between 7:00 am and noon on weekends.

State bulletins
State bulletins are produced by the ABC Local Radio station from the capital city of each state and mainland territory. They are broadcast to all ABC Local Radio and ABC Radio National stations in each state, and focus strongly on issues of state relevance, but also feature national and international stories. National bulletins air when state bulletins are not produced.
ABC Local Radio stations previously broadcast a flagship 15-minute state bulletin at 7:45 am, which in its final years was the only bulletin still introduced by the 18-second version of Majestic Fanfare. All other bulletins were introduced by a 9-second version of Majestic Fanfare. ABC Radio National and ABC Classic FM stations did not broadcast the 7:45 am bulletin, instead broadcasting an ordinary 8:00 am state bulletin and a 10-minute 7 am bulletin respectively, and continued to broadcast bulletins every hour when Local Radio stations broadcast bulletins every 30 minutes in the early morning. This bulletin began in 1939 and was discontinued in Sunday 20th September 2020.

ABC News ACT is broadcast at 5:30 am and on the hour between 6 am and 10 pm each day from the studios of ABC Radio Canberra.
ABC News New South Wales is broadcast at 5:30 am and on the hour between 6 am and 10 pm each day from the studios of ABC Radio Sydney.
ABC News Northern Territory is broadcast at 5:30 am and on the hour between 6 am and 10 pm each day from the studios of ABC Radio Darwin.
ABC News Queensland is broadcast at 5:30 am and on the hour between 6 am and 7 pm on weekdays from the studios of ABC Radio Brisbane. Weekend bulletins are broadcast on the hour between 6 am and midday.
ABC News South Australia is broadcast at 5:30 am and on the hour between 6 am and 10 pm on weekdays from the studios of ABC Radio Adelaide. Weekend bulletins are broadcast on the hour between 6 am and midday.
ABC News Tasmania is broadcast at 5:30 am and on the hour between 6 am and 9 pm on weekdays from the studios of ABC Radio Hobart. Weekend bulletins are broadcast on the hour between 6 am and midday.
ABC News Victoria is broadcast at 5:30 am and on the hour between 6 am and 10 pm on weekdays from the studios of ABC Radio Melbourne. Weekend bulletins are broadcast on the hour between 6 am and midday.
ABC News Western Australia is produced by ABC Radio Perth. Weekday bulletins are broadcast every 30 minutes between 5:00 am and 7:00 am, then at 7:45 am, then at 9:00 am, then every hour until 10:00 pm. Weekend bulletins are broadcast every 30 minutes between 6:00 am and 7:00 am, then at 7:45 am, then at 9:00 am, then every hour until 1:00 pm.

Current affairs
ABC News produces several current affairs programs for radio. All share a quasi-magazine format, and investigate stories in greater depth compared to news bulletins.

AM is broadcast in three editions – a 10-minute edition at 6:05 am on ABC Local Radio, a 20-minute edition at 7:10 am on ABC Radio National, and a flagship 30 minute edition at 8:00 am on ABC Local Radio.
The World Today is broadcast in one edition – a 30-minute edition at 12:10 pm on ABC Local Radio and ABC Radio National.
PM is broadcast in two editions – a 30-minute edition at 5:00 pm on ABC Radio National, and a flagship 30 minute edition at 6:30 pm on ABC Local Radio.

Programs
Other news-related, factual and current affairs programs broadcast by the various radio stations of the ABC Radio network include:

Sunday Extra, incorporating Background Briefing and Ockham's Razor, hosted by Julian Morrow (replacing Correspondents Report),
RN Breakfast
Late Night Live
Hack
Nightlife
Awaye!
Country Breakfast

Online
All ABC radio stations are available via an ABC News mobile app, ABC Listen, from which podcasts are also available.

Awards
In March 2024, ABC News won the 2023 Gold Lizzie for Best Title at the IT Journalism Awards, a shared honour between ABC News Story Lab and ABC Radio. ABC News also won Best Gaming Coverage and Best News Coverage.
The Best News Coverage award was for three stories about data breaches affecting Australians:

"See your identity pieced together from stolen data" (by Julian Fell, Ben Spraggon, and Matt Liddy)
"Why the FBI calls this Gold Coast man when it finds a trove of stolen data" (by Julian Fell, with photography by Tim Leslie)
"This is the most detailed portrait yet of data breaches in Australia" (by Julian Fell, Georgina Piper, and Matt Liddy)

Presenters
National

ACT

New South Wales

Northern Territory

Queensland

South Australia

Tasmania

Victoria

Western Australia

Other

Past

References
Further reading
ABC Bureaux and Foreign Correspondents
50 Years of ABC TV News and Current Affairs

External links
Official website
News on iview

================================================================================

# Abel Tasman

Abel Janszoon Tasman (Dutch: [ˈaːbəl ˈjɑnsoːn ˈtɑsmɑn]; 1603 – 10 October 1659) was a Dutch seafarer and explorer, best known for his voyages of 1642 and 1644 in the service of the Dutch East India Company (VOC). He was the first European to reach New Zealand, which he named Staten Landt. He was also the eponym of Tasmania.
Likely born in 1602 or 1603 in Lutjegast, Netherlands, Tasman started his career as a merchant seaman and became a skilled navigator. In 1633, he joined the VOC and sailed to Batavia, now Jakarta, Indonesia. He participated in several voyages, including one to Japan. In 1642, Tasman was appointed by the VOC to lead an expedition to explore the uncharted regions of the Southern Pacific Ocean. His mission was to discover new trade routes and to establish trade relations with the native inhabitants. After leaving Batavia, Tasman sailed westward to Mauritius, then south to the Roaring Forties, then eastward, and reached the coast of Tasmania, which he named Van Diemen's Land after his patron, Anthony van Diemen. He then sailed north east, and was the first European to discover the west coast of New Zealand, which he named Staten Landt. It was later renamed Nieuw Zeeland, after the Dutch province of Zeeland, by Joan Blaeu, official Dutch cartographer to the Dutch East India Company.
Despite his achievements, Tasman's expedition was not entirely successful. The encounter with the Māori people on the South Island of New Zealand resulted in a violent confrontation, which left four of Tasman's men dead. He returned to Batavia without having made any significant contact with the native inhabitants or establishing any trade relations. Nonetheless, Tasman's expedition paved the way for further exploitation and colonization of Australia and New Zealand by the British. Tasman continued to serve the Dutch East India Company until his death in 1659.

Biography
Early life
Abel Tasman was likely born in 1602 or 1603 in Lutjegast, a village in the Province of Groningen. He married Claesgie Heyndrix, with whom he had a daughter named Claesjen. A proclamation of his second marriage, given in December 1631 at Amsterdam, describes him as a widower and sailor. On 27 December 1631 as a 28-year old seafarer living in Amsterdam, he married 21-year-old Jannetje Tjaers, of Palmstraat in Amsterdam.

Relocation to the Dutch East Indies
Uneducated, but employed by the Dutch East India Company (VOC), Tasman learned navigation and seamanship on the job. In 1634, he was appointed skipper of the Mocha, and, under the command of Frans Valck, he went on a two-year voyage to the Maluku Islands.
Tasman sailed from Texel (Netherlands) to Batavia, now Jakarta, in 1633 taking the southern Brouwer Route. While based in Batavia, Tasman took part in a voyage to Seram Island (in what is now the Maluku Province in Indonesia) because the locals had sold spices to other European nationalities than the Dutch.
Tasman docked to find wood for repairs and was separated from the other ships; a fight broke out with local villagers and at least two of Tasman's men were killed.
By August 1637, Tasman had returned to Amsterdam, and in 1638 he signed on for another ten years and took his wife with him to Batavia via a six-month journey. On 25 March 1638, he tried to sell his property in the Jordaan, but the purchase was cancelled.
He was second-in-command of a 1639 expedition of exploration into the north Pacific under Matthijs Quast. The fleet included the ships Engel and Gracht and reached Fort Zeelandia (Dutch Formosa) and Deshima (an artificial island off Nagasaki, Japan).

First major voyage
In August 1642, the Council of the Indies, consisting of Antonie van Diemen, Cornelis van der Lijn, Joan Maetsuycker, Justus Schouten, Salomon Sweers, Cornelis Witsen, and Pieter Boreel in Batavia dispatched Tasman and Franchoijs Jacobszoon Visscher on a voyage of exploration to little-charted areas east of the Cape of Good Hope, west of Staten Land (near the Cape Horn of South America) and south of the Solomon Islands.
One of the objectives was to obtain knowledge of "all the totally unknown" Provinces of Beach. This was a purported yet phantom island said to have plentiful gold, which had appeared on European maps since the 15th century, as a result of an error in some editions of Marco Polo's works.
The expedition was to use two small ships, Heemskerck and Zeehaen.

Mauritius
In accordance with Visscher's directions, Tasman sailed from Batavia on 14 August 1642 and arrived at Mauritius on 5 September 1642, according to the captain's journal. The reason for this was the crew could be fed well on the island; there was plenty of fresh water and timber to repair the ships. Tasman got the assistance of the governor Adriaan van der Stel.
Because of the prevailing winds, Mauritius was chosen as a turning point. After a four-week stay on the island, both ships left on 8 October using the Roaring Forties to sail east as fast as possible. (No one had gone as far as Pieter Nuyts in 1626/27.) On 7 November, snow and hail influenced the ship's council to alter course to a more north-easterly direction, with the intention of having the Solomon Islands as their destination.

Tasmania
On 24 November 1642, Tasman reached and sighted the west coast of Tasmania, north of Macquarie Harbour. He named his discovery Van Diemen's Land, after Antonio van Diemen, Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies.
Proceeding south, Tasman skirted the southern end of Tasmania and turned north-east. He then tried to work his two ships into Adventure Bay on the east coast of South Bruny Island, but he was blown out to sea by a storm. This area he named Storm Bay. Two days later, on 1 December, Tasman anchored to the north of Cape Frederick Hendrick just north of the Forestier Peninsula. On 2 December, two ship's boats under the command of the Pilot, Major Visscher, rowed through the Marion Narrows into Blackman Bay, and then west to the outflow of Boomer Creek where they gathered some edible "greens". Tasman named the bay, Frederick Hendrik Bay, which included the present North Bay, Marion Bay and what is now Blackman Bay. (Tasman's original naming, Frederick Henrick Bay, was mistakenly transferred to its present location by Marion Dufresne in 1772). The next day, an attempt was made to land in North Bay. However, because the sea was too rough, a ship's carpenter swam through the surf and planted the Dutch flag. Tasman then claimed formal possession of the land on 3 December 1642.
For two more days, he continued to follow the east coast northward to see how far it went. When the land veered to the north-west at Eddystone Point, he tried to follow the coast line but his ships were suddenly hit by the Roaring Forties howling through Bass Strait. Tasman was on a mission to find the Southern Continent not more islands, so he abruptly turned away to the east and continued his continent-hunting.

New Zealand
Tasman had intended to proceed in a northerly direction but as the wind was unfavourable he steered east. The expedition endured a rough voyage and in one of his diary entries Tasman claimed that his compass was the only thing that had kept him alive.
On 13 December 1642 Tasman and his crew became the first Europeans to reach New Zealand when they sighted the north-west coast of the South Island. Tasman named it Staten Landt "in honour of the States General" (Dutch parliament). He wrote, "it is possible that this land joins to the Staten Landt but it is uncertain", referring to Isla de los Estados, a landmass of the same name at the southern tip of South America, encountered by the Dutch navigator Jacob Le Maire in 1616. However, in 1643 Brouwer's expedition to Valdivia found out that Staaten Landt was separated by sea from the hypothetical Southern Land. Tasman continued: "We believe that this is the mainland coast of the unknown Southland." Tasman thought he had found the western side of the long-imagined Terra Australis that stretched across the Pacific to near the southern tip of South America. On 14 December 1642 Tasman's ships anchored 7 km offshore c. 20km south of Cape Foulwind near Greymouth. The ships were observed by Māori who named a place on this coast Tiropahi (the place were a large sailing ship was seen).

After sailing north then east for five days, the expedition anchored about 7 kilometres (4.3 mi) from the coast off what is now Golden Bay. A group of Māori paddled out in a waka (canoe) and attacked some sailors who were rowing between the two Dutch vessels. Four sailors were clubbed to death with patu.In the evening about one hour after sunset we saw many lights on land and four vessels near the shore, two of which betook themselves towards us. When our two boats returned to the ships reporting that they had found not less than thirteen fathoms of water, and with the sinking of the sun (which sank behind the high land) they had been still about half a mile from the shore. After our people had been on board about one glass, people in the two canoes began to call out to us in gruff, hollow voices. We could not in the least understand any of it; however, when they called out again several times we called back to them as a token answer. But they did not come nearer than a stone's shot. They also blew many times on an instrument, which produced a sound like the moors' trumpets. We had one of our sailors (who could play somewhat on the trumpet) play some tunes to them in answer." As Tasman sailed out of the bay he observed 22 waka near the shore, of which "eleven swarming with people came off towards us". The waka approached the Zeehaen which fired and hit a man in the largest waka holding a small white flag. Canister shot also hit the side of a waka. Archaeologist Ian Barber suggests that local Māori were trying to secure a cultivation field under ritual protection (tapu) where they believed the Dutch were attempting to land. December was at the mid-point of the locally important sweet potato/kūmara (Ipomoea batatas) growing season. Tasman named the area "Murderers' Bay".
The expedition then sailed north, sighting Cook Strait, which separates the North and South Islands of New Zealand, and which it mistook for a bight and named "Zeehaen's Bight". Two names that the expedition gave to landmarks in the far north of New Zealand still endure: Cape Maria van Diemen and Three Kings Islands. (Kaap Pieter Boreels was renamed Cape Egmont by Captain James Cook 125 years later.)

Return voyage
En route back to Batavia, Tasman came across the Tongan archipelago on 20 January 1643. While passing the Fiji Islands Tasman's ships came close to being wrecked on the dangerous reefs of the north-eastern part of the Fiji group. He charted the eastern tip of Vanua Levu and Cikobia-i-Lau before making his way back into the open sea.
The expedition turned north-west towards New Guinea and arrived back in Batavia on 15 June 1643.

Second major voyage
Tasman left Batavia on 30 January 1644 on his second voyage with three ships: Limmen, Zeemeeuw and the tender Braek. He followed the south coast of New Guinea eastwards in an attempt to find a passage to the eastern side of New Holland. However, he missed the Torres Strait between New Guinea and Australia, probably due to the numerous reefs and islands obscuring potential routes, and continued his voyage by following the shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria westwards along the north Australian coast. He mapped the north coast of Australia, making observations on New Holland and its people. He arrived back in Batavia in August 1644.
From the point of view of the Dutch East India Company, Tasman's explorations were a disappointment: he had neither found a promising area for trade nor a useful new shipping route. Although Tasman was received courteously on his return, the company was upset that Tasman had not fully explored the lands he found, and decided that a more "persistent explorer" should be chosen for any future expeditions. For over a century, until the era of James Cook, Tasmania and New Zealand were not visited by Europeans; mainland Australia was visited, but usually only by accident.

Later life
On 2 November 1644, Abel Tasman was appointed a member of the Council of Justice in Batavia. He went to Sumatra in 1646, and in August 1647 to Siam (now Thailand) with letters from the company to the King. In May 1648, he was in charge of an expedition sent to Manila to try to intercept and loot the Spanish silver ships coming from America, but he had no success and returned to Batavia in January 1649. In November 1649, he was charged and found guilty of having in the previous year hanged one of his men without trial, was suspended from his office of commander, fined, and made to pay compensation to the relatives of the sailor. On 5 January 1651, he was formally reinstated in his rank and spent his remaining years at Batavia. He was in good circumstances, being one of the larger landowners in the town. In 1653, he retired; at that time he owned 288 acres of land in Batavia and captained a small cargo ship, of which he was a part-owner.
In April 1657, Tasman wrote his will and testament, describing himself as ill but not bedridden. Tasman died at Batavia on 10 October 1659 and was survived by his second wife and a daughter by his first wife. His property was divided between his wife and his daughter. In his will, he left 25 guilders to the poor of his village, Lutjegast.
Although Tasman's pilot, Frans Visscher, published Memoir concerning the discovery of the South land in 1642, Tasman's detailed journal was not published until 1898.  Nevertheless, some of his charts and maps were in general circulation and used by subsequent explorers. The journal signed by Abel Tasman of the 1642 voyage is held in the Dutch National Archives at The Hague.

Legacy
Tasman's ten-month voyage in 1642–43 had significant consequences. By circumnavigating Australia (albeit at a distance) Tasman proved that the small fifth continent was not joined to any larger sixth continent, such as the long-imagined Southern Continent. Further, Tasman's suggestion that New Zealand was the western side of that Southern Continent was seized upon by many European cartographers who, for the next century, depicted New Zealand as the west coast of a Terra Australis rising gradually from the waters around Tierra del Fuego. This theory was eventually disproved when Captain Cook circumnavigated New Zealand in 1769.

Multiple places have been named after Tasman, including:

The Australian island and state of Tasmania, renamed after him, formerly Van Diemen's land. It includes features such as:
The Tasman Peninsula.
The Tasman Bridge.
The Tasman Highway.
The Tasman Sea.
In New Zealand:
The Tasman Glacier.
Tasman Lake.
The Tasman River.
Mount Tasman.
The Abel Tasman National Park.
Tasman Bay.
The Tasman District.
Abel Tasman Monument.
Also named after Tasman are:

Tasman Pulp and Paper company, a large pulp and paper producer in Kawerau, New Zealand.
Abel Tasman Drive, in Tākaka.
The former passenger/vehicle ferry Abel Tasman.
The Able Tasmans – an indie band from Auckland, New Zealand.
Tasman, a layout engine for Internet Explorer.
6594 Tasman (1987 MM1), a main-belt asteroid.
Tasman Drive in San Jose, California, and its Tasman light rail station, named after the Tasman Sea.
Tasman Road in Claremont, Cape Town, South Africa.
HMNZS Tasman, shore-based training establishment of the Royal New Zealand Navy.
HMAS Tasman is a Hunter-class frigate that is expected to enter service with the Royal Australian Navy in the late 2020s.
His portrait has been on four New Zealand postage stamp issues, on a 1992 5 NZD coin, and on 1963, 1966 and 1985 Australian postage stamps.
In the Netherlands, many streets are named after him. In Lutjegast, the village where he was born, there is a museum dedicated to his life and travels.
Tasman's life was dramatised for radio in Early in the Morning (1946) a play by Ruth Park.

Portraits and depictions
A drawing titled Abel Janssen Tasman, Navigateur en Australie is held by the State Library of New South Wales as part of "a portfolio of 26 ink drawings of 16th and 17th century Dutch admirals, navigators and governor-generals of the VOC". The portfolio was acquired at an art auction in The Hague in 1862. However, it is unclear if the drawing is of Tasman and its original source is unknown, although it has been said to resemble the work of Dutch engraver Jacobus Houbraken. The drawing has been assessed as having the "most reliable provenance" of any depiction of Tasman with "no strong reason to doubt that the drawing is not genuine".
In 1948, the National Library of Australia acquired from Rex Nan Kivell a portrait purporting to depict Tasman with his wife and stepdaughter, which was attributed to Jacob Gerritsz. Cuyp and dated to 1637. In 2018 the painting was exhibited by the Groninger Museum in the Netherlands which identified it as "the only known portrait of the explorer". However, the Netherlands Institute for Art History has instead attributed the painting to Dirck van Santvoort and concluded that the painting does not depict Tasman and his family.
The provenance provided from Nan Kivell for the family portrait has been unable to be verified. Nan Kivell claimed that the portrait was passed down through the Springer family – relatives of Tasman's widow – and was sold at Christie's in 1877. However, Christie's records indicate that the portrait was not owned by the Springer family or associated with Tasman, and was instead sold as "Portrait of an astronomer" by "Anthonie Palamedes" [sic]. Nan Kivell additionally claimed that the portrait was sold at Christie's a second time in 1941, however no records exist to support this. A survey of portraits of Tasman published in 2019 concluded that the provenance was "either invented by Rex Nan Kivell or by the unnamed art dealer who sold it to Rex Nan Kivell", and that the painting "should therefore not be considered a portrait of Abel Tasman's family".
Outside of the Nan Kivell painting, another purported portrait of Tasman was "discovered" in 1893 and eventually acquired by the Tasmanian government in 1976 for the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery (TMAG). The painting is unsigned and was attributed to Bartholomeus van der Helst at the time of its discovery, but this attribution was disputed by Dutch art historian Cornelis Hofstede de Groot and Alec Martin of Christie's. In 1985, TMAG curator Dan Gregg stated that "the painter of the life-sized portrait is unknown [...] there is some uncertainty as to whether the portrait is really of Tasman".

Tasman map
Held within the collection of the State Library of New South Wales is the Tasman map, thought to have been drawn by Isaac Gilsemans, or completed under the supervision of Franz Jacobszoon Visscher. The map is also known as the Bonaparte map, as it was once owned by Prince Roland Bonaparte, the great-nephew of Napoleon. The map was completed sometime after 1644 and is based on the original charts drawn during Tasman's first and second voyages. As none of the journals or logs composed during Tasman's second voyage have survived, the Bonaparte map remains an important contemporary artefact of Tasman's voyage to the northern coast of the Australian continent.
The Tasman map reveals the extent of understanding the Dutch had of the Australian continent at the time. The map includes the western and southern coasts of Australia, accidentally encountered by Dutch voyagers as they journeyed by way of the Cape of Good Hope to the VOC headquarters in Batavia. In addition, the map shows the tracks of Tasman's two voyages. Of his second voyage, the map shows the Banda Islands, the southern coast of New Guinea and much of the northern coast of Australia. However, the land areas adjacent to the Torres Strait are shown unexamined; this is despite Tasman having been given orders by VOC Council at Batavia to explore the possibility of a channel between New Guinea and the Australian continent.
There is debate as to the origin of the map. It is widely believed that the map was produced in Batavia; however, it has also been argued that the map was produced in Amsterdam. The authorship of the map has also been debated: while the map is commonly attributed to Tasman, it is now thought to have been the result of a collaboration, probably involving Franchoijs Visscher and Isaack Gilsemans, who took part in both of Tasman's voyages. Whether the map was produced in 1644 is also subject to debate, as a VOC company report in December 1644 suggested that at that time no maps showing Tasman's voyages were yet complete.
In 1943, a mosaic version of the map, composed of coloured brass and marble, was inlaid into the vestibule floor of the Mitchell Library in Sydney. The work was commissioned by the Principal Librarian William Ifould, and completed by the Melocco Brothers of Annandale, who also worked on the ANZAC War Memorial in Hyde Park and the crypt at St Mary's Cathedral, Sydney.

See also
Dieppe maps
Willem Janszoon
Janszoon voyage of 1605–06
Theory of Portuguese discovery of Australia

References
Sources
Serle, Percival (1949). "Tasman, Abel". Dictionary of Australian Biography. Sydney: Angus & Robertson.
Edward Duyker (ed.) The Discovery of Tasmania: Journal Extracts from the Expeditions of Abel Janszoon Tasman and Marc-Joseph Marion Dufresne 1642 & 1772, St David's Park Publishing/Tasmanian Government Printing Office, Hobart, 1992, pp. 106, ISBN 0-7246-2241-1.
William Eaton (1905), Tasman: a forgotten navigator, Brisbane: Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Wikidata Q108780897
Mack, Rüdiger (2019). "New light on the portraits of Abel Tasman". The Great Circle. 41 (2). Australian Association for Maritime History: 46–64. JSTOR 26910735.
Quanchi, Max (2005). Historical Dictionary of the Discovery and Exploration of the Pacific Islands. The Scarecrow Press. ISBN 0810853957.
Beazley, Charles Raymond (1911), "Tasman, Abel Janszoon" , in Chisholm, Hugh (ed.), Encyclopædia Britannica, vol. 26 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp. 437–438
Mack, Rudiger (2024), First Encounters: The Early Pacific and European Narratives of Abel Tasman's 1642 Voyage. Feilding, New Zealand: Heritage Press. ISBN 978-1-991097-00-2

External links
 Media related to Abel Tasman at Wikimedia Commons
Works by Abel Tasman at the Biodiversity Heritage Library 
Works by Abel Tasman at Open Library 
Works by or about Abel Tasman at the Internet Archive

================================================================================

# Abraham Ortelius

Abraham Ortelius (; also Ortels, Orthellius, Wortels; 4 or 14 April 1527 – 28 June 1598) was a cartographer, geographer, and cosmographer from Antwerp in the Spanish Netherlands. He is recognized as the creator of the first modern atlas, the Theatrum Orbis Terrarum (Theatre of the World). Along with Gemma Frisius and Gerardus Mercator, Ortelius is generally considered one of the founders of the Netherlandish school of cartography and geography. He was a notable figure of this school in its golden age (approximately 1570s–1670s) and an important geographer of Spain during the age of discovery. The publication of his atlas in 1570 is often considered as the official beginning of the Golden Age of Netherlandish cartography. He was the first person proposing that the continents were joined before drifting to their present positions.

Life
Abraham Ortelius was born on either 4 April or 14 April 1527 in the city of Antwerp, which was then in the Spanish Netherlands. The Ortels or Wortels (latinized as Orthellius and Ortelius) family was originally from Augsburg, a Free imperial city of the Holy Roman Empire. Abraham's grandfather, Willem Ortels, was a pharmacist. He had moved in 1460 to Antwerp where he married Mathilde 's Jagers, alias Reynaerts. They had five children: Imbert who inherited his father's pharmacy, Anna, Odille (or Ottilia of Odilia), who married Nicolaes van der Voorden, a merchant in Brussels, and, in her second marriage, Jacobus van Meteren from Breda, who was a Protestant and supervised the printing of English versions of the bible in England, Leonard (born in 1500 and father of Abraham Ortelius) and Josef. From his second marriage with Maria Antheard a son called Willem was born.  The family lived in the Kipdorp street in Antwerp and was fairly well off.  Leonard Ortelius married Anna Herwayers and they had three children, Abraham, Anna who would stay on her brother's side and Elisabeth who married a trader named Jacob Cool Sr., whose son Jacob Cool Jr. (known as Ortelianus) would be the principal heir of Abraham Ortelius.
Leonard Ortelius was well educated. He spoke Greek and Latin, and worked with his brother-in-law Jacob van Meteren on the translation of Miles Coverdale's  English Bible. In 1535, they were both prosecuted for possessing suspicious books. Searches turned up nothing and the case was subsequently dismissed. Leonard Ortelius was a successful antique dealer. Following the death of his father, Abraham Ortelius' uncle Jacobus van Meteren returned from exile in England to take care of him. Abraham remained close to his cousin Emanuel van Meteren, who would later move to London. In 1575 Abraham was appointed geographer to the king of Spain, Philip II, on the recommendation of Arias Montanus, who vouched for his orthodoxy.
He traveled extensively in Europe and is specifically known to have traveled throughout the Habsburg Netherlands; in southern, western, northern, and eastern Germany (e.g., 1560, 1575–1576); France (1559–1560); England and Ireland (1576); and Italy (1578, and perhaps two or three times between 1550 and 1558).
Beginning as a map-engraver, in 1547 he entered the Antwerp Guild of Saint Luke as an illuminator of maps. He supplemented his income trading in books, prints, and maps, and his journeys included annual visits to the Frankfurt book and print fair, where he met Gerardus Mercator in 1554. In 1560, however, when travelling with Mercator to Trier, Lorraine, and Poitiers, he seems to have been attracted, largely by Mercator's influence, towards the career of a scientific geographer. He died in Antwerp.

Map publisher
In 1564, he published his first map, Typus Orbis Terrarum, an eight-leaved wall map of the world, on which he identified the Regio Patalis with Locach as a northward extension of the Terra Australis, reaching as far as New Guinea. This map subsequently appeared in reduced form in the Terrarum (the only extant copy is now at Basel University Library). He also published a two-sheet map of Egypt in 1565, a plan of the Brittenburg castle on the coast of the Netherlands in 1568, an eight-sheet map of Asia in 1567, and a six-sheet map of Spain before the appearance of his atlas.
In England Ortelius's contacts included William Camden, Richard Hakluyt, Thomas Penny, Puritan controversialist William Charke, and Humphrey Llwyd, who would contribute the map of England and Wales to Ortelius's 1573 edition of the Theatrum.
In 1578, he laid the basis of a critical treatment of ancient geography by his Synonymia geographica (issued by the Plantin Press at Antwerp and republished in expanded form as Thesaurus geographicus in 1587 and again expanded in 1596; in the last edition, Ortelius considers the possibility of continental drift, a hypothesis that would be proved correct only centuries later).
In 1596, he received a presentation from Antwerp, similar to that afterwards bestowed on Peter Paul Rubens. His death on 28 June 1598 and his burial in the church of St. Michael's Abbey, Antwerp, were marked by public mourning. The inscription on his tombstone reads: Quietis cultor sine lite, uxore, prole ("served quietly, without accusation, wife, and offspring").

Theatrum Orbis Terrarum
On 20 May 1570, Gilles Coppens de Diest at Antwerp issued Ortelius's Theatrum Orbis Terrarum, the "first modern atlas" (of 53 maps). Three Latin editions of this (besides a Dutch, a French, and a German edition) appeared before the end of 1572; twenty-five editions came out before Ortelius's death in 1598; and several others were published subsequently, for the atlas continued to be in demand until about 1612. Most of the maps were admittedly reproductions (a list of 87 authors is given in the first Theatrum by Ortelius himself, growing to 183 names in the 1601 Latin edition), and many discrepancies of delineation or nomenclature occur. Errors, of course, abound, both in general conceptions and in detail; thus South America is initially very faulty in outline, but corrected in the 1587 French edition, and in Scotland, the Grampians lie between the Forth and the Clyde; but, taken as a whole, this atlas with its accompanying text was a monument of rare erudition and industry. Its immediate precursor and prototype was a collection of thirty-eight maps of European lands, and of Asia, Africa, Tartary, and Egypt, gathered together by the wealth and enterprise, and through the agents, of Ortelius's friend and patron, Gillis Hooftman (1521–1581), lord of Cleydael and Aertselaar: most of these were printed in Rome, eight or nine only in the Southern Netherlands.

In 1573, Ortelius published seventeen supplementary maps under the title Additamentum Theatri Orbis Terrarum. Four more Additamenta were to follow, the last one appearing in 1597. He also had a keen interest in and formed a fine collection of coins, medals and antiques, and this resulted in the book (also in 1573, published by Philippe Galle of Antwerp) Deorum dearumque capita ... ex Museo Ortelii ("Heads of the gods and goddesses... from the Ortelius Museum"); reprinted in 1582, 1602, 1612, 1680, 1683 and finally in 1699 by Gronovius, Thesaurus Graecarum Antiquitatum ("Treasury of Greek Antiquities", vol. vii).
The Theatrum Orbis Terrarum inspired a six-volume work titled Civitates orbis terrarum, edited by Georg Braun and illustrated by Frans Hogenberg with the assistance of Ortelius himself, who visited England to see his friend John Dee in Mortlake in 1577, and Braun tells of Ortelius putting pebbles in cracks in Temple Church, Bristol, being crushed by the vibration of the bells.

Later maps
In 1579, Ortelius brought out his Nomenclator Ptolemaicus and started his Parergon (a series of maps illustrating ancient history, sacred and secular). He also published Itinerarium per nonnullas Galliae Belgicae partes (at the Plantin press in 1584, and reprinted in 1630, 1661 in Hegenitius, Itin. Frisio-Hoil., in 1667 by Verbiest, and finally in 1757 in Leuven), a record of a journey in Belgium and the Rhineland made in 1575. In 1589 he published Maris Pacifici, the first dedicated map of the Pacific to be printed. Among his last works were an edition of Caesar (C. I. Caesaris omnia quae extant, Leiden, Raphelingen, 1593), and the Aurei saeculi imago, sive Germanorum veterum vita, mores, ritus et religio. (Philippe Galle, Antwerp, 1596). He also aided Welser in his edition of the Peutinger Table in 1598.
Contrary to popular belief, Abraham Ortelius, who had no children, never lived at the Mercator-Orteliushuis (Kloosterstraat 11–17, Antwerpen), but lived at his sister's house (Kloosterstraat 33–35, Antwerpen).

Modern use of maps
Originals of Ortelius's maps are popular collectors' items and often sell for tens of thousands of dollars. Facsimiles of his maps are also available from many retailers. A map he made of North and South America is also included in the world's largest commercially available jigsaw puzzle, which is of four world maps. This puzzle is made by Ravensburger, measures 6 feet (1.8 m) × 9 feet (2.7 m), and has over 18,000 pieces.

Imagining continental drift
Ortelius was the first to underline the geometrical similarity between the coasts of America and Europe-Africa and to propose continental drift as an explanation. Kious described Ortelius's thoughts in this way:

Abraham Ortelius in his work Thesaurus Geographicus … suggested that the Americas were "torn away from Europe and Africa … by earthquakes and floods" and went on to say: "The vestiges of the rupture reveal themselves, if someone brings forward a map of the world and considers carefully the coasts of the three [continents]."
Ortelius's observations of continental juxtaposition and his proposal of rupture and separation went unnoticed until the late 20th century. However, they were repeated in the 18th and 19th centuries (for example, Antonio Snider-Pellegrini) and later by Alfred Wegener, who published his hypothesis of continental drift in 1912 and in following years. Because his publications were widely available in German and English and because he adduced geological support for the idea, Wegener is credited by most geologists as the first to recognize the possibility of continental drift. Frank Bursley Taylor (in 1908) was also an early advocate of continental drift.  During the 1960s geophysical and geological evidence for seafloor spreading at mid-oceanic ridges became increasingly compelling to geologists (e.g. Harry H. Hess, 1960) and finally established continental drift as an ongoing global mechanism (e.g. by the work of W. Jason Morgan by 1967 and Dan McKenzie in 1968). After more than three centuries, Ortelius's supposition of continental drift was vindicated.

Bibliography
Ortelius, Abraham (1603). Nomenclator ptolemaicus (in Latin). Antwerpen: Robert Bruneau.
Ortelius, Abraham (1609). Theatrum orbis terrarum (in Latin). Antwerpen: Jean Baptiste Vrints.
Abraham Ortelius, Theatrum Orbis Terrarum. Gedruckt zu Nuermberg durch Johann Koler Anno MDLXXII. Mit einer Einführung und Erläuterungen von Ute Schneider. Second unchanged edition (2. unveränd. Aufl). Darmstadt, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2007.

Notes
References
Sources
Binding, Paul (2003). Imagined Corners: exploring the world's first atlas. London: Review Books. ISBN 0747230404.
Depuydt, Joost (2004). "Ortelius, Abraham (1527–1598)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/20854. (Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.)
Génard, P. (1880). "La généalogie du géographe Abraham Ortelius". Bulletin de la Société royale de Géographie d'Anvers. 5: 312–49.
Hess, H. H. (1960). "Nature of great oceanic ridges". Preprints of the First International Oceanographic Congress (New York, August 31 – September 12, 1959. Washington: American Association for the Advancement of Science. (A). pp. 33–34.
Hessels, J. H., ed. (1887). Abrahami Ortelii epistulae. Ecclesiae Londino-Batavae archivvm. Vol. 1. Cambridge.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) (an edition of Ortelius's letters)
Karrow, Robert J. Jr. (1993). Mapmakers of the Sixteenth Century and their Maps: bio-bibliographies of the cartographers of Abraham Ortelius, 1570. Chicago: Speculum Orbis Press. ISBN 0932757057.
Koeman, C. (1964). The History of Abraham Ortelius and his Theatrum Orbis Terrarum. Lausanne: Sequoia.
Rooses, Max (1880). "Ortelius et Plantin: note communiqué à M. P. Genard". Bulletin de la Société royale de géographie d'Anvers. 5: 350–356.
van den Broecke, Marcel (2011) . Ortelius Atlas Maps: an illustrated guide (2nd ed.). Houten: HeS & De Graaf. ISBN 9789061943808.
van den Broecke, Marcel; van der Krogt, Peter; Meurer, Peter, eds. (1998). Abraham Ortelius and the First Atlas: essays commemorating the quadricentennial of his death, 1598–1998. Houten: HeS Publishers. ISBN 9789061943884.
van Meteren, Emanuel (1670). Historia Belgica. Amsterdam.
Wauwermans, H. E. (1895). Histoire de l'école cartographique belge et anversoise du XVe siècle. Vol. 2. Brussels: Institute nationale de géographie. pp. 109–61, 452–59.
Wauwermans, H. E. (1901). "Abraham Ortels ou Wortels, dit Ortelius, géographe et antiquaire". Biographie Nationale de Belgique. Vol. 16. Brussels. pp. 291–332.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
Wegener, Alfred (July 1912). "Die Entstehung der Kontinente". Geologische Rundschau. 3 (4): 276–92. Bibcode:1912GeoRu...3..276W. doi:10.1007/BF02202896. S2CID 129316588.
Wegener, Alfred (1966). The Origin of Continents and Oceans. Translated by Biram, John. New York: Dover. ISBN 0-486-61708-4. (Translated from the fourth revised German edition.)
Wehrenberg, Charles (2001) . Before New York. San Francisco: Solo Zone. ISBN 1-886163-16-2.

Further reading
Meganck, Tine Luk (2017). Erudite Eyes: friendship, art and erudition in the network of Abraham Ortelius (1527–1598). Boston: Brill. ISBN 978-9-004-34167-8.

See also
Theatrum Orbis Terrarum (Theatre of the World)
History of cartography
Early modern Netherlandish cartography
Golden Age of Netherlandish cartography

External links
 Media related to Abraham Ortelius at Wikimedia Commons

================================================================================

# Physical oceanography

Physical oceanography is the study of physical conditions and physical processes within the ocean, especially the motions and physical properties of ocean waters.
Physical oceanography is one of several sub-domains into which oceanography is divided. Others include biological, chemical and geological oceanography.
Physical oceanography may be subdivided into descriptive and dynamical physical oceanography.
Descriptive physical oceanography seeks to research the ocean through observations and complex numerical models, which describe the fluid motions as precisely as possible.
Dynamical physical oceanography  focuses primarily upon the processes that govern the motion of fluids with emphasis upon theoretical research and numerical models. These are part of the large field of Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (GFD) that is shared together with meteorology. GFD is a sub field of Fluid dynamics  describing flows occurring on spatial and temporal scales that are greatly influenced by the Coriolis force.

Physical setting
Roughly 97% of the planet's water is in its oceans, and the oceans are the source of the vast majority of water vapor that condenses in the atmosphere and falls as rain or snow on the continents. The tremendous heat capacity of the oceans moderates the planet's climate, and its absorption of various gases affects the composition of the atmosphere. The ocean's influence extends even to the composition of volcanic rocks through seafloor metamorphism, as well as to that of volcanic gases and magmas created at subduction zones.
From sea level, the oceans are far deeper than the continents are tall; examination of the Earth's hypsographic curve shows that the average elevation of Earth's landmasses is only 840 metres (2,760 ft), while the ocean's average depth is 3,800 metres (12,500 ft). Though this apparent discrepancy is great, for both land and sea, the respective extremes such as mountains and trenches are rare.

Temperature, salinity and density
Because the vast majority of the world ocean's volume is deep water, the mean temperature of seawater is low; roughly 75% of the ocean's volume has a temperature from 0° – 5 °C (Pinet 1996). The same percentage falls in a salinity range between 34 and 35 ppt (3.4–3.5%) (Pinet 1996). There is still quite a bit of variation, however. Surface temperatures can range from below freezing near the poles to 35 °C in restricted tropical seas, while salinity can vary from 10 to 41 ppt (1.0–4.1%).
The vertical structure of the temperature can be divided into three basic layers, a surface mixed layer, where gradients are low, a thermocline where gradients are high, and a poorly stratified abyss.
In terms of temperature, the ocean's layers are highly latitude-dependent; the thermocline is pronounced in the tropics, but nonexistent in polar waters (Marshak 2001). The halocline usually lies near the surface, where evaporation raises salinity in the tropics, or meltwater dilutes it in polar regions. These variations of salinity and temperature with depth change the density of the seawater, creating the pycnocline.

Temperature
The temperature of ocean water varies significantly across different regions and depths. As mentioned, the vast majority of ocean water (around 75%) lies between 0° and 5°C, mostly in the deep ocean, where sunlight does not penetrate. The surface layers, however, experience far greater variability. In polar regions, surface temperatures can drop below freezing, while in tropical and subtropical regions, they may reach up to 35°C. This thermal stratification results in a vertical temperature gradient that divides the ocean into distinct layers.

Surface Mixed Layer: This uppermost layer is well-mixed due to wind and wave action, resulting in minimal temperature variation with depth. The thickness of this layer varies depending on location and season but can extend from 50 to 200 meters.
Thermocline: Below the mixed layer lies the thermocline, a zone where temperature decreases rapidly with increasing depth. The thermocline is especially pronounced in tropical and temperate regions but is absent in polar waters where surface temperatures are already near freezing. The depth and sharpness of the thermocline can shift with seasonal changes and ocean currents, playing a critical role in regulating heat exchange between the ocean and the atmosphere.
Abyssal Zone: Beneath the thermocline is the deep ocean or abyssal zone, where temperatures remain relatively uniform, hovering just above freezing (0°-3°C). This cold, dense water originates from polar regions, where surface water cools, sinks, and spreads towards the equator along the ocean floor, forming the deep ocean circulation system.

Salinity
Salinity, a measure of the concentration of dissolved salts in seawater, typically ranges between 34 and 35 parts per thousand (ppt) in most of the world’s oceans. However, localized factors such as evaporation, precipitation, river runoff, and ice formation or melting cause significant variations in salinity. These variations are often most evident in coastal areas and marginal seas.

Surface Salinity: In the open ocean, salinity is generally highest in subtropical regions where high evaporation rates dominate, and lowest in regions of high precipitation or freshwater influx from rivers, such as the mouths of the Amazon and Congo Rivers. Tropical and subtropical seas, such as the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, can experience salinities as high as 40-41 ppt due to intense evaporation and restricted water exchange with the open ocean.
Halocline: The halocline is a layer within the ocean where salinity changes rapidly with depth. This stratification can be influenced by surface processes like evaporation (which increases salinity) and freshwater input (which decreases it). The halocline often coincides with the thermocline, particularly in tropical and subtropical regions, contributing to overall water column stability.
Polar Regions: In polar areas, surface salinity is generally lower due to freshwater input from melting ice. During sea ice formation, however, brine rejection increases the salinity of surrounding waters, contributing to the sinking of dense water masses and the formation of deep ocean currents that drive global circulation patterns.
The salt in the oceans originates from runoff from terrestrial sources as well as hydrothermal vents. It has been estimated that the salinity of oceans was greater in the distant past than it is today.

Density and the Pycnocline
The combination of temperature and salinity variations leads to changes in seawater density. Seawater density is primarily influenced by both these factors—colder, saltier water is denser than warmer, fresher water. This variation in density creates stratification in the ocean and is key to understanding ocean circulation patterns.

Pycnocline: The pycnocline is a layer within the ocean where the density increases rapidly with depth. It typically coincides with the thermocline and halocline in tropical and subtropical waters, forming a sharp boundary between the less dense surface waters and the denser deep ocean waters. This density stratification acts as a barrier to vertical mixing, limiting the exchange of heat, gases, and nutrients between the surface and deep ocean layers.
Thermohaline Circulation: Density differences drive the thermohaline circulation, also known as the global "conveyor belt," which plays a crucial role in regulating Earth's climate. Cold, dense water formed in the polar regions sinks and moves along the ocean floor toward the equator, while warmer surface waters flow poleward to replace it. This global circulation helps redistribute heat and maintains the ocean's dynamic equilibrium.
Regional Variations: In areas of upwelling or downwelling, the density structure of the water column can be disrupted. Upwelling brings cooler, nutrient-rich water to the surface, while downwelling pushes surface waters to greater depths, impacting local ecosystems and global climate.
Understanding the complex interactions between temperature, salinity, and density is essential for predicting ocean circulation patterns, climate change effects, and the health of marine ecosystems. These factors also influence marine life, as many species are sensitive to the specific temperature and salinity ranges of their habitats.

Circulation
Energy for the ocean circulation (and for the atmospheric circulation) comes from solar radiation and gravitational energy from the Sun and Moon.  The amount of sunlight absorbed at the surface varies strongly with latitude, being greater at the equator than at the poles, and this engenders fluid motion in both the atmosphere and ocean that acts to redistribute heat from the equator towards the poles, thereby reducing the temperature gradients that would exist in the absence of fluid motion. Perhaps three quarters of this heat is carried in the atmosphere; the rest is carried in the ocean.
The atmosphere is heated from below, which leads to convection, the largest expression of which is the Hadley circulation. By contrast the ocean is heated from above, which tends to suppress convection. Instead ocean deep water is formed in polar regions where cold salty waters sink in fairly restricted areas. This is the beginning of the thermohaline circulation.
Oceanic currents are largely driven by the surface wind stress; hence the large-scale atmospheric circulation is important to understanding the ocean circulation. The Hadley circulation leads to Easterly winds in the tropics and Westerlies in mid-latitudes. This leads to slow equatorward flow throughout most of a subtropical ocean basin (the Sverdrup balance). The return flow occurs in an intense, narrow, poleward western boundary current. Like the atmosphere, the ocean is far wider than it is deep, and hence horizontal motion is in general much faster than vertical motion. In the southern hemisphere there is a continuous belt of ocean, and hence the mid-latitude westerlies force the strong Antarctic Circumpolar Current. In the northern hemisphere the land masses prevent this and the ocean circulation is broken into smaller gyres in the Atlantic and Pacific basins.

Coriolis effect
The Coriolis effect results in a deflection of fluid flows (to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and left in the Southern Hemisphere). This has profound effects on the flow of the oceans. In particular it means the flow goes around high and low pressure systems, permitting them to persist for long periods of time. As a result, tiny variations in pressure can produce measurable currents. A slope of one part in one million in sea surface height, for example, will result in a current of 10 cm/s at mid-latitudes. The fact that the Coriolis effect is largest at the poles and weak at the equator results in sharp, relatively steady western boundary currents which are absent on eastern boundaries. Also see secondary circulation effects.

Ekman transport
Ekman transport results in the net transport of surface water 90 degrees to the right of the wind in the Northern Hemisphere, and 90 degrees to the left of the wind in the Southern Hemisphere. As the wind blows across the surface of the ocean, it "grabs" onto a thin layer of the surface water. In turn, that thin sheet of water transfers motion energy to the thin layer of water under it, and so on. However, because of the Coriolis Effect, the direction of travel of the layers of water slowly move farther and farther to the right as they get deeper in the Northern Hemisphere, and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. In most cases, the very bottom layer of water affected by the wind is at a depth of 100 m – 150 m and is traveling about 180 degrees, completely opposite of the direction that the wind is blowing. Overall, the net transport of water would be 90 degrees from the original direction of the wind.

Langmuir circulation
Langmuir circulation results in the occurrence of thin, visible stripes, called windrows on the surface of the ocean parallel to the direction that the wind is blowing. If the wind is blowing with more than 3 m s−1, it can create parallel windrows alternating upwelling and downwelling about 5–300 m apart. These windrows are created by adjacent ovular water cells (extending to about 6 m (20 ft) deep) alternating rotating clockwise and counterclockwise. In the convergence zones debris, foam and seaweed accumulates, while at the divergence zones plankton are caught and carried to the surface. If there are many plankton in the divergence zone fish are often attracted to feed on them.

Ocean–atmosphere interface
At the ocean-atmosphere interface, the ocean and atmosphere exchange fluxes of heat, moisture and momentum.

Heat
The important heat terms at the surface are the sensible heat flux, the latent heat flux, the incoming solar radiation and the balance of long-wave (infrared) radiation. In general, the tropical oceans will tend to show a net gain of heat, and the polar oceans a net loss, the result of a net transfer of energy polewards in the oceans.
The oceans' large heat capacity moderates the climate of areas adjacent to the oceans, leading to a maritime climate at such locations. This can be a result of heat storage in summer and release in winter; or of transport of heat from warmer locations: a particularly notable example of this is Western Europe, which is heated at least in part by the north atlantic drift.

Momentum
Surface winds tend to be of order meters per second; ocean currents of order centimeters per second. Hence from the point of view of the atmosphere, the ocean can be considered effectively stationary; from the point of view of the ocean, the atmosphere imposes a significant wind stress on its surface, and this forces large-scale currents in the ocean.
Through the wind stress, the wind generates ocean surface waves; the longer waves have a phase velocity tending towards the wind speed. Momentum of the surface winds is transferred into the energy flux by the ocean surface waves. The increased roughness of the ocean surface, by the presence of the waves, changes the wind near the surface.

Moisture
The ocean can gain moisture from rainfall, or lose it through evaporation. Evaporative loss leaves the ocean saltier; the Mediterranean and Persian Gulf for example have strong evaporative loss; the resulting plume of dense salty water may be traced through the Straits of Gibraltar into the Atlantic Ocean. At one time, it was believed that evaporation/precipitation was a major driver of ocean currents; it is now known to be only a very minor factor.

Planetary waves
Kelvin Waves

A Kelvin wave is any progressive wave that is channeled between two boundaries or opposing forces (usually between the Coriolis force and a coastline or the equator). There are two types, coastal and equatorial. Kelvin waves are gravity driven and non-dispersive. This means that Kelvin waves can retain their shape and direction over long periods of time. They are usually created by a sudden shift in the wind, such as the change of the trade winds at the beginning of the El Niño-Southern Oscillation.
Coastal Kelvin waves follow shorelines and will always propagate in a counterclockwise direction in the Northern hemisphere (with the shoreline to the right of the direction of travel) and clockwise in the Southern hemisphere.
Equatorial Kelvin waves propagate to the east in the Northern and Southern hemispheres, using the equator as a guide.
Kelvin waves are known to have very high speeds, typically around 2–3 meters per second. They have wavelengths of thousands of kilometers and amplitudes in the tens of meters.

Rossby Waves

Rossby waves, or planetary waves are huge, slow waves generated in the troposphere by temperature differences between the ocean and the continents. Their major restoring force is the change in Coriolis force with latitude. Their wave amplitudes are usually in the tens of meters and very large wavelengths. They are usually found at low or mid latitudes.
There are two types of Rossby waves, barotropic and baroclinic. Barotropic Rossby waves have the highest speeds and do not vary vertically. Baroclinic Rossby waves are much slower.
The special identifying feature of Rossby waves is that the phase velocity of each individual wave always has a westward component, but the group velocity can be in any direction. Usually the shorter Rossby waves have an eastward group velocity and the longer ones have a westward group velocity.

Climate variability
The interaction of ocean circulation, which serves as a type of heat pump, and biological effects such as the concentration of carbon dioxide can result in global climate changes on a time scale of decades. Known climate oscillations resulting from these interactions, include the Pacific decadal oscillation, North Atlantic oscillation, and Arctic oscillation. The oceanic process of thermohaline circulation is a significant component of heat redistribution across the globe, and changes in this circulation can have major impacts upon the climate.

La Niña–El Niño
Antarctic circumpolar wave
This is a coupled ocean/atmosphere wave that circles the Southern Ocean about every eight years. Since it is a wave-2 phenomenon (there are two peaks and two troughs in a latitude circle) at each fixed point in space a signal with a period of four years is seen. The wave moves eastward in the direction of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current.

Ocean currents
Among the most important ocean currents are the:

Antarctic Circumpolar Current
Deep ocean (density-driven)
Western boundary currents
Gulf Stream
Kuroshio Current
Labrador Current
Oyashio Current
Agulhas Current
Brazil Current
East Australia Current
Eastern Boundary currents
California Current
Canary Current
Peru Current
Benguela Current

Antarctic circumpolar
The ocean body surrounding the Antarctic is currently the only continuous body of water where there is a wide latitude band of open water. It interconnects the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans, and provide an uninterrupted stretch for the prevailing westerly winds to significantly increase wave amplitudes. It is generally accepted that these prevailing winds are primarily responsible for the circumpolar current transport. This current is now thought to vary with time, possibly in an oscillatory manner.

Deep ocean
In the Norwegian Sea evaporative cooling is predominant, and the sinking water mass, the North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW), fills the basin and spills southwards through crevasses in the submarine sills that connect Greenland, Iceland and Britain. It then flows along the western boundary of the Atlantic with some part of the flow moving eastward along the equator and then poleward into the ocean basins. The NADW is entrained into the Circumpolar Current, and can be traced into the Indian and Pacific basins. Flow from the Arctic Ocean Basin into the Pacific, however, is blocked by the narrow shallows of the Bering Strait.
Also see marine geology about that explores the geology of the ocean floor including plate tectonics that create deep ocean trenches.

Western boundary
An idealised subtropical ocean basin forced by winds circling around a high pressure (anticyclonic) systems such as the Azores-Bermuda high develops a gyre circulation with slow steady flows towards the equator in the interior. As discussed by Henry Stommel, these flows are balanced in the region of the western boundary, where a thin fast polewards flow called a western boundary current develops. Flow in the real ocean is more complex, but the Gulf Stream, Agulhas and Kuroshio are examples of such currents. They are narrow (approximately 100 km across) and fast (approximately 1.5 m/s).
Equatorwards western boundary currents occur in tropical and polar locations, e.g. the East Greenland and Labrador currents, in the Atlantic and the Oyashio. They are forced by winds circulation around low pressure (cyclonic).

Gulf Stream
The Gulf Stream, together with its northern extension, North Atlantic Current, is a powerful, warm, and swift Atlantic Ocean current that originates in the Gulf of Mexico, exits through the Strait of Florida, and follows the eastern coastlines of the United States and Newfoundland to the northeast before crossing the Atlantic Ocean.

Kuroshio
The Kuroshio Current is an ocean current found in the western Pacific Ocean off the east coast of Taiwan and flowing northeastward past Japan, where it merges with the easterly drift of the North Pacific Current. It is analogous to the Gulf Stream in the Atlantic Ocean, transporting warm, tropical water northward towards the polar region.

Heat flux
Heat storage
Ocean heat flux is a turbulent and complex system which utilizes atmospheric measurement techniques such as eddy covariance to measure the rate of heat transfer expressed in the unit of or petawatts. Heat flux is the flow of energy per unit of area per unit of time. Most of the Earth's heat storage is within its seas with smaller fractions of the heat transfer in processes such as evaporation, radiation, diffusion, or absorption into the sea floor. The majority of the ocean heat flux is through advection or the movement of the ocean's currents. For example, the majority of the warm water movement in the south Atlantic is thought to have originated in the Indian Ocean. Another example of advection is the nonequatorial Pacific heating which results from subsurface processes related to atmospheric anticlines.  Recent warming observations of Antarctic bottom water in the Southern Ocean is of concern to ocean scientists because bottom water changes will effect currents, nutrients, and biota elsewhere. The international awareness of global warming has focused scientific research on this topic since the 1988 creation of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Improved ocean observation, instrumentation, theory, and funding has increased scientific reporting on regional and global issues related to heat.

Sea level change
Tide gauges and satellite altimetry suggest an increase in sea level of 1.5–3 mm/yr over the past 100 years.
The IPCC predicts that by 2081–2100, global warming will lead to a sea level rise of 260 to 820 mm.

Rapid variations
Tides
The rise and fall of the oceans due to tidal effects is a key influence upon the coastal areas. Ocean tides on the planet Earth are created by the gravitational effects of the Sun and Moon. The tides produced by these two bodies are roughly comparable in magnitude, but the orbital motion of the Moon results in tidal patterns that vary over the course of a month.
The ebb and flow of the tides produce a cyclical current along the coast, and the strength of this current can be quite dramatic along narrow estuaries. Incoming tides can also produce a tidal bore along a river or narrow bay as the water flow against the current results in a wave on the surface.
Tide and Current (Wyban 1992) clearly illustrates the impact of these natural cycles on the lifestyle and livelihood of Native Hawaiians tending coastal fishponds. Aia ke ola ka hana meaning . . . Life is in labor.
Tidal resonance occurs in the Bay of Fundy since the time it takes for a large wave to travel from the mouth of the bay to the opposite end, then reflect and travel back to the mouth of the bay coincides with the tidal rhythm producing the world's highest tides.
As the surface tide oscillates over topography, such as submerged seamounts or ridges, it generates internal waves at the tidal frequency, which are known as internal tides.

Tsunamis
A series of surface waves can be generated due to large-scale displacement of the ocean water. These can be caused by sub-marine landslides, seafloor deformations due to earthquakes, or the impact of a large meteorite.
The waves can travel with a velocity of up to several hundred km/hour across the ocean surface, but in mid-ocean they are barely detectable with wavelengths spanning hundreds of kilometers.
Tsunamis, originally called tidal waves, were renamed because they are not related to the tides. They are regarded as shallow-water waves, or waves in water with a depth less than 1/20 their wavelength. Tsunamis have very large periods, high speeds, and great wave heights.
The primary impact of these waves is along the coastal shoreline, as large amounts of ocean water are cyclically propelled inland and then drawn out to sea. This can result in significant modifications to the coastline regions where the waves strike with sufficient energy.
The tsunami that occurred in Lituya Bay, Alaska on July 9, 1958 was 520 m (1,710 ft) high and is the biggest tsunami ever measured, almost 90 m (300 ft) taller than the Sears Tower in Chicago and about 110 m (360 ft) taller than the former World Trade Center in New York.

Surface waves
The wind generates ocean surface waves, which have a large impact on offshore structures, ships, Coastal erosion and sedimentation, as well as harbours. After their generation by the wind, ocean surface waves can travel (as swell) over long distances.

See also
References
Further reading
Gill, Adrian E. (1982). Atmosphere-Ocean Dynamics. San Diego: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-283520-4.
Samelson, R. M. (2011) The Theory of Large-Scale Ocean Circulation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.                                           doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511736605.
Maury, Matthew F. (1855). The Physical Geography of the Seas and Its Meteorology.
Stewart, Robert H. (2007). Introduction to Physical Oceanography (PDF). College Station: Texas A&M University. OCLC 169907785. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-29.
Wyban, Carol Araki (1992). Tide and Current: Fishponds of Hawaiʻi. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press. ISBN 0-8248-1396-0.

External links
Way, John H. "Hypsographic curve". Archived from the original on 2007-03-30. Retrieved 2006-01-10.
NASA Oceanography
Ocean Motion and Surface Currents
Ocean World (digital book)
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
Pacific Disaster Center
Pacific Tsunami Museum Hilo, Hawaii
Science of Tsunami Hazards Archived 2006-02-07 at the Wayback Machine (journal)
NEMO academic software for oceanography
 History of Salinity Determination

================================================================================

# Chemical oceanography

Marine chemistry, also known as ocean chemistry or chemical oceanography, is the study of the chemical composition and processes of the world’s oceans, including the interactions between seawater, the atmosphere, the seafloor, and marine organisms. This field encompasses a wide range of topics, such as the cycling of elements like carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus, the behavior of trace metals, and the study of gases and nutrients in marine environments. Marine chemistry plays a crucial role in understanding global biogeochemical cycles, ocean circulation, and the effects of human activities, such as pollution and climate change, on oceanic systems. It is influenced by plate tectonics and seafloor spreading, turbidity, currents, sediments, pH levels, atmospheric constituents, metamorphic activity, and ecology.
The impact of human activity on the chemistry of the Earth's oceans has increased over time, with pollution from industry and various land-use practices significantly affecting the oceans. Moreover, increasing levels of carbon dioxide in the Earth's atmosphere have led to ocean acidification, which has negative effects on marine ecosystems. The international community has agreed that restoring the chemistry of the oceans is a priority, and efforts toward this goal are tracked as part of Sustainable Development Goal 14.
Due to the interrelatedness of the ocean, chemical oceanographers frequently work on problems relevant to physical oceanography, geology and geochemistry, biology and biochemistry, and atmospheric science. Many of them are investigating biogeochemical cycles, and the marine carbon cycle in particular attracts significant interest due to its role in carbon sequestration and ocean acidification. Other major topics of interest include analytical chemistry of the oceans, marine pollution, and anthropogenic climate change.

Organic compounds in the oceans
Dissolved Organic Matter (DOM)
DOM is a critical component of the ocean's carbon pool and includes many molecules such as amino acids, sugars, and lipids. It represents about 90% of the total organic carbon in marine environments. Colored dissolved organic matter (CDOM) is estimated to range from 20-70% of the carbon content of the oceans, being higher near river outlets and lower in the open ocean. DOM can be recycled and put back into the food web through a process called microbial loop which is essential for nutrient cycling and supporting primary productivity. It also plays a vital role in the global regulation of oceanic carbon storage, as some forms resist microbial degradation and may exist within the ocean for centuries. Marine life is similar mainly in biochemistry to terrestrial organisms, and is the most prolific source of halogenated organic compounds.

Particulate Organic Matter (POM)
POM includes of large organic particles, such as organisms, fecal pellets, and detritus, which settle through the water column. It is a major component of the biological pump, a process by which carbon is transferred from the surface ocean to the deep sea. As POM sinks, it decomposes by bacterial activity, releasing nutrients and carbon dioxide. The refractory POM fraction can settle on the ocean floor and make relevant contributions to carbon sequestration over a very long period of time

Chemical ecology of extremophiles
The ocean is home to a variety of marine organisms known as extremophiles – organisms that thrive in extreme conditions of temperature, pressure, and light availability. Extremophiles inhabit many unique habitats in the ocean, such as hydrothermal vents, black smokers, cold seeps, hypersaline regions, and sea ice brine pockets. Some scientists have speculated that life may have evolved from hydrothermal vents in the ocean.In hydrothermal vents and similar environments, many extremophiles acquire energy through chemoautotrophy, using chemical compounds as energy sources, rather than light as in photoautotrophy. Hydrothermal vents enrich the nearby environment in chemicals such as elemental sulfur, H2, H2S, Fe2+, and methane. Chemoautotrophic organisms, primarily prokaryotes, derive energy from these chemicals through redox reactions. These organisms then serve as food sources for higher trophic levels, forming the basis of unique ecosystems.
Several different metabolisms are present in hydrothermal vent ecosystems. Many marine microorganisms, including Thiomicrospira, Halothiobacillus, and Beggiatoa, are capable of oxidizing sulfur compounds, including elemental sulfur and the often toxic compound H2S. H2S is abundant in hydrothermal vents, formed through interactions between seawater and rock at the high temperatures found within vents. This compound is a major energy source, forming the basis of the sulfur cycle in hydrothermal vent ecosystems. In the colder waters surrounding vents, sulfur-oxidation can occur using oxygen as an electron acceptor; closer to the vents, organisms must use alternate metabolic pathways or utilize another electron acceptor, such as nitrate. Some species of Thiomicrospira can utilize thiosulfate as an electron donor, producing elemental sulfur. Additionally, many marine microorganisms are capable of iron-oxidation, such as Mariprofundus ferrooxydans. Iron-oxidation can be oxic, occurring in oxygen-rich parts of the ocean, or anoxic, requiring either an electron acceptor such as nitrate or light energy. In iron-oxidation, Fe(II) is used as an electron donor; conversely, iron-reducers utilize Fe(III) as an electron acceptor. These two metabolisms form the basis of the iron-redox cycle and may have contributed to banded iron formations.
At another extreme, some marine extremophiles inhabit sea ice brine pockets where temperature is very low and salinity is very high. Organisms trapped within freezing sea ice must adapt to a rapid change in salinity up to 3 times higher than that of regular seawater, as well as the rapid change to regular seawater salinity when ice melts. Most brine-pocket dwelling organisms are photosynthetic, therefore, these microenvironments can become hyperoxic, which can be toxic to its inhabitants. Thus, these extremophiles often produce high levels of antioxidants.

Plate tectonics
Seafloor spreading on mid-ocean ridges is a global scale ion-exchange system. Hydrothermal vents at spreading centers introduce various amounts of iron, sulfur, manganese, silicon and other elements into the ocean, some of which are recycled into the ocean crust. Helium-3, an isotope that accompanies volcanism from the mantle, is emitted by hydrothermal vents and can be detected in plumes within the ocean.
Spreading rates on mid-ocean ridges vary between 10 and 200 mm/yr. Rapid spreading rates cause increased basalt reactions with seawater. The magnesium/calcium ratio will be lower because more magnesium ions are being removed from seawater and consumed by the rock, and more calcium ions are being removed from the rock and released to seawater. Hydrothermal activity at ridge crest is efficient in removing magnesium. A lower Mg/Ca ratio favors the precipitation of low-Mg calcite polymorphs of calcium carbonate (calcite seas).
Slow spreading at mid-ocean ridges has the opposite effect and will result in a higher Mg/Ca ratio favoring the precipitation of aragonite and high-Mg calcite polymorphs of calcium carbonate (aragonite seas).
Experiments show that most modern high-Mg calcite organisms would have been low-Mg calcite in past calcite seas, meaning that the Mg/Ca ratio in an organism's skeleton varies with the Mg/Ca ratio of the seawater in which it was grown.
The mineralogy of reef-building and sediment-producing organisms is thus regulated by chemical reactions occurring along the mid-ocean ridge, the rate of which is controlled by the rate of sea-floor spreading.

Human impacts
Marine pollution
Climate change
Increased carbon dioxide levels, mostly from burning fossil fuels, are changing ocean chemistry. Global warming and changes in salinity have significant implications for the ecology of marine environments.

Acidification
Deoxygenation
History
Early inquiries about marine chemistry usually concerned the origin of salinity in the ocean, including work by Robert Boyle. Modern chemical oceanography began as a field with the 1872–1876 Challenger expedition, led by the British Royal Navy which made the first systematic measurements of ocean chemistry. The chemical analysis of these samples providing the first systematic study of the composition of seawater was conducted by John Murray and George Forchhammer, leading to a better understanding of elements like chloride, sodium, and sulfate in ocean waters
The early 20th century saw significant advancements in marine chemistry, particularly with more accurate analytical techniques. Scientists like Martin Knudsen created the Knudsen Bottle, an instrument used to collect water samples from different ocean depths. Over the past three decades (1970s, 19802, and 1990s), a comprehensive evaluation of advancements in chemical oceanography was compiled through a National Science Foundation initiative known as Futures of Ocean Chemistry in the United States (FOCUS). This project brought together numerous prominent chemical oceanographers, marine chemists, and geochemists to contribute to the FOCUS report.
After World War II, advancements in geochemical techniques propelled marine chemistry into a new era. Researchers began using isotopic analysis to study ocean circulation and the carbon cycle. Roger Revelle and Hans Suess pioneered using radiocarbon dating to investigate oceanic carbon reservoirs and their exchange with the atmosphere.
Since the 1970s, the development of highly sophisticated instruments and computational models has revolutionized marine chemistry. Scientists can now measure trace metals, organic compounds, and isotopic ratios with unprecedented precision. Studies of marine biogeochemical cycles, including the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles, have become an area of interest to understand global climate change. The use of remote sensing technology and global ocean observation programs, such as the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), has provided large-scale data on ocean chemistry, allowing scientists to monitor ocean acidification, deoxygenation, and other critical issues affecting the marine environment.

Tools used for analysis
Chemical oceanographers collect and measure chemicals in seawater, using the standard toolset of analytical chemistry as well as instruments like pH meters, electrical conductivity meters, fluorometers, and dissolved CO2 meters. Most data are collected through shipboard measurements and from autonomous floats or buoys, but remote sensing is used as well. On an oceanographic research vessel, a CTD is used to measure electrical conductivity, temperature, and pressure, and is often mounted on a rosette of Nansen bottles to collect seawater for analysis. Sediments are commonly studied with a box corer or a sediment trap, and older sediments may be recovered by scientific drilling. 

Advanced analytical equipment such as mass spectrometers and chromatographs are applied to detect trace elements, isotopes, and organic compounds. This allows for precisely measuring nutrients, gases, and pollutants in marine environments. In recent years, autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) and remote sensing technology have enabled continuous, large-scale ocean chemistry monitoring, particularly for tracking changes in ocean acidification and nutrient cycles.

Marine chemistry on other planets and their moons
The chemistry of the subsurface ocean of Europa may be Earthlike. The subsurface ocean of Enceladus vents hydrogen and carbon dioxide to space.

See also
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project
Oceanography
Physical oceanography
World Ocean Atlas
Seawater
RISE project

== References ==

================================================================================

# Acid

An acid is a molecule or ion capable of either donating a proton (i.e. hydrogen cation, H+), known as a Brønsted–Lowry acid, or forming a covalent bond with an electron pair, known as a Lewis acid.
The first category of acids are the proton donors, or Brønsted–Lowry acids. In the special case of aqueous solutions, proton donors form the hydronium ion H3O+ and are known as Arrhenius acids. Brønsted and Lowry generalized the Arrhenius theory to include non-aqueous solvents. A Brønsted–Lowry or Arrhenius acid usually contains a hydrogen atom bonded to a chemical structure that is still energetically favorable after loss of H+.
Aqueous Arrhenius acids have characteristic properties that provide a practical description of an acid. Acids form aqueous solutions with a sour taste, can turn blue litmus red, and react with bases and certain metals (like calcium) to form salts. The word acid is derived from the Latin acidus, meaning 'sour'. An aqueous solution of an acid has a pH less than 7 and is colloquially also referred to as "acid" (as in "dissolved in acid"), while the strict definition refers only to the solute. A lower pH means a higher acidity, and thus a higher concentration of hydrogen cations in the solution. Chemicals or substances having the property of an acid are said to be acidic.
Common aqueous acids include hydrochloric acid (a solution of hydrogen chloride that is found in gastric acid in the stomach and activates digestive enzymes), acetic acid (vinegar is a dilute aqueous solution of this liquid), sulfuric acid (used in car batteries), and citric acid (found in citrus fruits). As these examples show, acids (in the colloquial sense) can be solutions or pure substances, and can be derived from acids (in the strict sense) that are solids, liquids, or gases. Strong acids and some concentrated weak acids are corrosive, but there are exceptions such as carboranes and boric acid.
The second category of acids are Lewis acids, which form a covalent bond with an electron pair. An example is boron trifluoride (BF3), whose boron atom has a vacant orbital that can form a covalent bond by sharing a lone pair of electrons on an atom in a base, for example the nitrogen atom in ammonia (NH3). Lewis considered this as a generalization of the Brønsted definition, so that an acid is a chemical species that accepts electron pairs either directly or by releasing protons (H+) into the solution, which then accept electron pairs. Hydrogen chloride, acetic acid, and most other Brønsted–Lowry acids cannot form a covalent bond with an electron pair, however, and are therefore not Lewis acids. Conversely, many Lewis acids are not Arrhenius or Brønsted–Lowry acids. In modern terminology, an acid is implicitly a Brønsted acid and not a Lewis acid, since chemists almost always refer to a Lewis acid explicitly as such.

Definitions and concepts
Modern definitions are concerned with the fundamental chemical reactions common to all acids.
Most acids encountered in everyday life are aqueous solutions, or can be dissolved in water, so the Arrhenius and Brønsted–Lowry definitions are the most relevant.
The Brønsted–Lowry definition is the most widely used definition; unless otherwise specified, acid–base reactions are assumed to involve the transfer of a proton (H+) from an acid to a base.
Hydronium ions are acids according to all three definitions. Although alcohols and amines can be Brønsted–Lowry acids, they can also function as Lewis bases due to the lone pairs of electrons on their oxygen and nitrogen atoms.

Arrhenius acids
In 1884, Svante Arrhenius attributed the properties of acidity to hydrogen cations (H+), later described as protons or hydrons. An Arrhenius acid is a substance that, when added to water, increases the concentration of H+ ions in the water. Chemists often write H+(aq) and refer to the hydrogen cation when describing acid–base reactions but the free hydrogen nucleus, a proton, does not exist alone in water, it exists as the hydronium ion (H3O+) or other forms (H5O2+, H9O4+). Thus, an Arrhenius acid can also be described as a substance that increases the concentration of hydronium ions when added to water. Examples include molecular substances such as hydrogen chloride and acetic acid.
An Arrhenius base, on the other hand, is a substance that increases the concentration of hydroxide (OH−) ions when dissolved in water. This decreases the concentration of hydronium because the ions react to form H2O molecules:

H3O+(aq) + OH−(aq) ⇌ H2O(liq) + H2O(liq)
Due to this equilibrium, any increase in the concentration of hydronium is accompanied by a decrease in the concentration of hydroxide. Thus, an Arrhenius acid could also be said to be one that decreases hydroxide concentration, while an Arrhenius base increases it.
In an acidic solution, the concentration of hydronium ions is greater than 10−7 moles per liter. Since pH is defined as the negative logarithm of the concentration of hydronium ions, acidic solutions thus have a pH of less than 7.

Brønsted–Lowry acids
While the Arrhenius concept is useful for describing many reactions, it is also quite limited in its scope. In 1923, chemists Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted and Thomas Martin Lowry independently recognized that acid–base reactions involve the transfer of a proton. A Brønsted–Lowry acid (or simply Brønsted acid) is a species that donates a proton to a Brønsted–Lowry base. Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory has several advantages over Arrhenius theory. Consider the following reactions of acetic acid (CH3COOH), the organic acid that gives vinegar its characteristic taste:

CH3COOH + H2O  ⇌  CH3COO− + H3O+
CH3COOH + NH3  ⇌  CH3COO− + NH+4
Both theories easily describe the first reaction: CH3COOH acts as an Arrhenius acid because it acts as a source of H3O+ when dissolved in water, and it acts as a Brønsted acid by donating a proton to water. In the second example CH3COOH undergoes the same transformation, in this case donating a proton to ammonia (NH3), but does not relate to the Arrhenius definition of an acid because the reaction does not produce hydronium. Nevertheless, CH3COOH is both an Arrhenius and a Brønsted–Lowry acid.
Brønsted–Lowry theory can be used to describe reactions of molecular compounds in nonaqueous solution or the gas phase. Hydrogen chloride (HCl) and ammonia combine under several different conditions to form ammonium chloride, NH4Cl. In aqueous solution HCl behaves as hydrochloric acid and exists as hydronium and chloride ions. The following reactions illustrate the limitations of Arrhenius's definition:

H3O+(aq) + Cl−(aq) + NH3 → Cl−(aq) + NH+4(aq) + H2O
HCl(benzene) + NH3(benzene) → NH4Cl(s)
HCl(g) + NH3(g) → NH4Cl(s)
As with the acetic acid reactions, both definitions work for the first example, where water is the solvent and hydronium ion is formed by the HCl solute. The next two reactions do not involve the formation of ions but are still proton-transfer reactions. In the second reaction hydrogen chloride and ammonia (dissolved in benzene) react to form solid ammonium chloride in a benzene solvent and in the third gaseous HCl and NH3 combine to form the solid.

Lewis acids
A third, only marginally related concept was proposed in 1923 by Gilbert N. Lewis, which includes reactions with acid–base characteristics that do not involve a proton transfer. A Lewis acid is a species that accepts a pair of electrons from another species; in other words, it is an electron pair acceptor. Brønsted acid–base reactions are proton transfer reactions while Lewis acid–base reactions are electron pair transfers. Many Lewis acids are not Brønsted–Lowry acids. Contrast how the following reactions are described in terms of acid–base chemistry:

In the first reaction a fluoride ion, F−, gives up an electron pair to boron trifluoride to form the product tetrafluoroborate. Fluoride "loses" a pair of valence electrons because the electrons shared in the B—F bond are located in the region of space between the two atomic nuclei and are therefore more distant from the fluoride nucleus than they are in the lone fluoride ion. BF3 is a Lewis acid because it accepts the electron pair from fluoride. This reaction cannot be described in terms of Brønsted theory because there is no proton transfer.
The second reaction can be described using either theory. A proton is transferred from an unspecified Brønsted acid to ammonia, a Brønsted base; alternatively, ammonia acts as a Lewis base and transfers a lone pair of electrons to form a bond with a hydrogen ion. The species that gains the electron pair is the Lewis acid; for example, the oxygen atom in H3O+ gains a pair of electrons when one of the H—O bonds is broken and the electrons shared in the bond become localized on oxygen. 
Depending on the context, a Lewis acid may also be described as an oxidizer or an electrophile. Organic Brønsted acids, such as acetic, citric, or oxalic acid, are not Lewis acids. They dissociate in water to produce a Lewis acid, H+, but at the same time, they also yield an equal amount of a Lewis base (acetate, citrate, or oxalate, respectively, for the acids mentioned). This article deals mostly with Brønsted acids rather than Lewis acids.

Dissociation and equilibrium
Reactions of acids are often generalized in the form HA  ⇌  H+ + A−, where HA represents the acid and A− is the conjugate base. This reaction is referred to as protolysis. The protonated form (HA) of an acid is also sometimes referred to as the free acid.
Acid–base conjugate pairs differ by one proton, and can be interconverted by the addition or removal of a proton (protonation and deprotonation, respectively). The acid can be the charged species and the conjugate base can be neutral in which case the generalized reaction scheme could be written as HA+  ⇌  H+ + A. In solution there exists an equilibrium between the acid and its conjugate base. The equilibrium constant K is an expression of the equilibrium concentrations of the molecules or the ions in solution. Brackets indicate concentration, such that [H2O] means the concentration of H2O. The acid dissociation constant Ka is generally used in the context of acid–base reactions. The numerical value of Ka is equal to the product (multiplication) of the concentrations of the products divided by the concentration of the reactants, where the reactant is the acid (HA) and the products are the conjugate base and H+.

          K

            a

        =

                [

                  H

                    +

                ]

                [

                  A

                    −

                ]

                [
                HA
                ]

    {\displaystyle K_{a}={\frac {{\ce {[H+] [A^{-}]}}}{{\ce {[HA]}}}}}

The stronger of two acids will have a higher Ka than the weaker acid; the ratio of hydrogen cations to acid will be higher for the stronger acid as the stronger acid has a greater tendency to lose its proton. Because the range of possible values for Ka spans many orders of magnitude, a more manageable constant, pKa is more frequently used, where pKa = −log10 Ka. Stronger acids have a smaller pKa than weaker acids. Experimentally determined pKa at 25 °C in aqueous solution are often quoted in textbooks and reference material.

Nomenclature
Arrhenius acids are named according to their anions. In the classical naming system, the ionic suffix is dropped and replaced with a new suffix, according to the table following. The prefix "hydro-" is used when the acid is made up of just hydrogen and one other element. For example, HCl has chloride as its anion, so the hydro- prefix is used, and the -ide suffix makes the name take the form hydrochloric acid.
Classical naming system:

In the IUPAC naming system, "aqueous" is simply added to the name of the ionic compound. Thus, for hydrogen chloride, as an acid solution, the IUPAC name is aqueous hydrogen chloride.

Acid strength
The strength of an acid refers to its ability or tendency to lose a proton. A strong acid is one that completely dissociates in water; in other words, one mole of a strong acid HA dissolves in water yielding one mole of H+ and one mole of the conjugate base, A−, and none of the protonated acid HA. In contrast, a weak acid only partially dissociates and at equilibrium both the acid and the conjugate base are in solution. Examples of strong acids are hydrochloric acid (HCl), hydroiodic acid (HI), hydrobromic acid (HBr), perchloric acid (HClO4), nitric acid (HNO3) and sulfuric acid (H2SO4). In water, each of these essentially ionizes 100%. The stronger an acid is, the more easily it loses a proton, H+. Two key factors that contribute to the ease of deprotonation are the polarity of the H—A bond and the size of atom A, which determines the strength of the H—A bond. Acid strengths are also often discussed in terms of the stability of the conjugate base.
Stronger acids have a larger acid dissociation constant, Ka and a lower pKa than weaker acids.
Sulfonic acids, which are organic oxyacids, are a class of strong acids. A common example is toluenesulfonic acid (tosylic acid). Unlike sulfuric acid itself, sulfonic acids can be solids. In fact, polystyrene functionalized into polystyrene sulfonate is a solid strongly acidic plastic that is filterable.
Superacids are acids stronger than 100% sulfuric acid. Examples of superacids are fluoroantimonic acid, magic acid and perchloric acid. The strongest known acid is helium hydride ion, with a proton affinity of 177.8kJ/mol. Superacids can permanently protonate water to give ionic, crystalline hydronium "salts". They can also quantitatively stabilize carbocations.
While Ka measures the strength of an acid compound, the strength of an aqueous acid solution is measured by pH, which is an indication of the concentration of hydronium in the solution. The pH of a simple solution of an acid compound in water is determined by the dilution of the compound and the compound's Ka.

Lewis acid strength in non-aqueous solutions
Lewis acids have been classified in the ECW model and it has been shown that there is no one order of acid strengths.  The relative acceptor strength of Lewis acids toward a series of bases, versus other Lewis acids, can be illustrated by C-B plots.  It has been shown that to define the order of Lewis acid strength at least two properties must be considered. For Pearson's qualitative HSAB theory the two properties are hardness and strength while for Drago's quantitative ECW model the two properties are electrostatic and covalent.

Chemical characteristics
Monoprotic acids
Monoprotic acids, also known as monobasic acids, are those acids that are able to donate one proton per molecule during the process of dissociation (sometimes called ionization) as shown below (symbolized by HA):

HA (aq) + H2O (l)  ⇌  H3O+ (aq) + A− (aq)      Ka
Common examples of monoprotic acids in mineral acids include hydrochloric acid (HCl) and nitric acid (HNO3). On the other hand, for organic acids the term mainly indicates the presence of one carboxylic acid group and sometimes these acids are known as monocarboxylic acid. Examples in organic acids include formic acid (HCOOH), acetic acid (CH3COOH) and benzoic acid (C6H5COOH).

Polyprotic acids
Polyprotic acids, also known as polybasic acids, are able to donate more than one proton per acid molecule, in contrast to monoprotic acids that only donate one proton per molecule. Specific types of polyprotic acids have more specific names, such as diprotic (or dibasic) acid (two potential protons to donate), and triprotic (or tribasic) acid (three potential protons to donate). Some macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids can have a very large number of acidic protons.
A diprotic acid (here symbolized by H2A) can undergo one or two dissociations depending on the pH. Each dissociation has its own dissociation constant, Ka1 and Ka2.

H2A (aq) + H2O (l)  ⇌  H3O+ (aq) + HA− (aq)     Ka1
HA− (aq) + H2O (l)  ⇌  H3O+ (aq) + A2− (aq)       Ka2
The first dissociation constant is typically greater than the second (i.e., Ka1 > Ka2). For example, sulfuric acid (H2SO4) can donate one proton to form the bisulfate anion (HSO−4), for which Ka1 is very large; then it can donate a second proton to form the sulfate anion (SO2−4), wherein the Ka2 is intermediate strength. The large Ka1 for the first dissociation makes sulfuric a strong acid. In a similar manner, the weak unstable carbonic acid (H2CO3) can lose one proton to form bicarbonate anion (HCO−3) and lose a second to form carbonate anion (CO2−3). Both Ka values are small, but Ka1 > Ka2 .
A triprotic acid (H3A) can undergo one, two, or three dissociations and has three dissociation constants, where Ka1 > Ka2 > Ka3.

H3A (aq) + H2O (l)  ⇌  H3O+ (aq) + H2A− (aq)      Ka1
H2A− (aq) + H2O (l)  ⇌  H3O+ (aq) + HA2− (aq)       Ka2
HA2− (aq) + H2O (l)  ⇌  H3O+ (aq) + A3− (aq)      Ka3
An inorganic example of a triprotic acid is orthophosphoric acid (H3PO4), usually just called phosphoric acid. All three protons can be successively lost to yield H2PO−4, then HPO2−4, and finally PO3−4, the orthophosphate ion, usually just called phosphate. Even though the positions of the three protons on the original phosphoric acid molecule are equivalent, the successive Ka values differ since it is energetically less favorable to lose a proton if the conjugate base is more negatively charged. An organic example of a triprotic acid is citric acid, which can successively lose three protons to finally form the citrate ion.
Although the subsequent loss of each hydrogen ion is less favorable, all of the conjugate bases are present in solution. The fractional concentration, α (alpha), for each species can be calculated. For example, a generic diprotic acid will generate 3 species in solution: H2A, HA−, and A2−. The fractional concentrations can be calculated as below when given either the pH (which can be converted to the [H+]) or the concentrations of the acid with all its conjugate bases:

                  α

                        H

                          2

                      A

                =

                          [

                            H

                              +

                          ]

                          2

                            [

                              H

                                +

                            ]

                            2

                      +
                      [

                          H

                            +

                      ]

                        K

                          1

                      +

                        K

                          1

                        K

                          2

                =

                        [

                          H

                            2

                        A
                        ]

                            [

                              H

                                2

                            A
                            ]

                      +
                      [
                      H

                        A

                          −

                      ]
                      +
                      [

                        A

                          2
                          −

                      ]

                  α

                        HA

                          −

                =

                      [

                          H

                            +

                      ]

                        K

                          1

                            [

                              H

                                +

                            ]

                            2

                      +
                      [

                          H

                            +

                      ]

                        K

                          1

                      +

                        K

                          1

                        K

                          2

                =

                        [
                        HA

                          −

                        ]

                          [

                            H

                              2

                          A
                          ]

                      +

                        [
                        H

                          A

                            −

                        ]

                      +

                        [

                          A

                            2
                            −

                        ]

                  α

                        A

                          2

                            −

                =

                        K

                          1

                        K

                          2

                            [

                              H

                                +

                            ]

                            2

                      +
                      [

                          H

                            +

                      ]

                        K

                          1

                      +

                        K

                          1

                        K

                          2

                =

                        [

                          A

                            2

                              −

                        ]

                            [

                              H

                                2

                            A
                            ]

                      +

                        [
                        H

                          A

                            −

                        ]

                      +

                        [

                          A

                            2
                            −

                        ]

    {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\alpha _{{\ce {H2A}}}&={\frac {{\ce {[H+]^2}}}{{\ce {[H+]^2}}+[{\ce {H+}}]K_{1}+K_{1}K_{2}}}={\frac {{\ce {[H2A]}}}{{\ce {{[H2A]}}}+[HA^{-}]+[A^{2-}]}}\\\alpha _{{\ce {HA^-}}}&={\frac {[{\ce {H+}}]K_{1}}{{\ce {[H+]^2}}+[{\ce {H+}}]K_{1}+K_{1}K_{2}}}={\frac {{\ce {[HA^-]}}}{{\ce {[H2A]}}+{[HA^{-}]}+{[A^{2-}]}}}\\\alpha _{{\ce {A^{2-}}}}&={\frac {K_{1}K_{2}}{{\ce {[H+]^2}}+[{\ce {H+}}]K_{1}+K_{1}K_{2}}}={\frac {{\ce {[A^{2-}]}}}{{\ce {{[H2A]}}}+{[HA^{-}]}+{[A^{2-}]}}}\end{aligned}}}

A plot of these fractional concentrations against pH, for given K1 and K2, is known as a Bjerrum plot. A pattern is observed in the above equations and can be expanded to the general n -protic acid that has been deprotonated i -times:

          α

                H

                n
                −
                i

              A

                i
                −

        =

              [

                  H

                    +

                ]

                  n
                  −
                  i

                  ∏

                    j
                    =
                    0

                    i

                  K

                    j

                    ∑

                      i
                      =
                      0

                      n

                      [

                  [

                      H

                        +

                    ]

                      n
                      −
                      i

                      ∏

                        j
                        =
                        0

                        i

                      K

                        j

                  ]

    {\displaystyle \alpha _{{\ce {H}}_{n-i}A^{i-}}={{[{\ce {H+}}]^{n-i}\displaystyle \prod _{j=0}^{i}K_{j}} \over {\displaystyle \sum _{i=0}^{n}{\Big [}[{\ce {H+}}]^{n-i}\displaystyle \prod _{j=0}^{i}K_{j}}{\Big ]}}}

where K0 = 1 and the other K-terms are the dissociation constants for the acid.

Neutralization
Neutralization is the reaction between an acid and a base, producing a salt and neutralized base; for example, hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide form sodium chloride and water:

HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) → H2O(l) + NaCl(aq)
Neutralization is the basis of titration, where a pH indicator shows equivalence point when the equivalent number of moles of a base have been added to an acid. It is often wrongly assumed that neutralization should result in a solution with pH 7.0, which is only the case with similar acid and base strengths during a reaction.
Neutralization with a base weaker than the acid results in a weakly acidic salt. An example is the weakly acidic ammonium chloride, which is produced from the strong acid hydrogen chloride and the weak base ammonia. Conversely, neutralizing a weak acid with a strong base gives a weakly basic salt (e.g., sodium fluoride from hydrogen fluoride and sodium hydroxide).

Weak acid–weak base equilibrium
In order for a protonated acid to lose a proton, the pH of the system must rise above the pKa of the acid. The decreased concentration of H+ in that basic solution shifts the equilibrium towards the conjugate base form (the deprotonated form of the acid). In lower-pH (more acidic) solutions, there is a high enough H+ concentration in the solution to cause the acid to remain in its protonated form.
Solutions of weak acids and salts of their conjugate bases form buffer solutions.

Titration
To determine the concentration of an acid in an aqueous solution, an acid–base titration is commonly performed. A strong base solution with a known concentration, usually NaOH or KOH, is added to neutralize the acid solution according to the color change of the indicator with the amount of base added. The titration curve of an acid titrated by a base has two axes, with the base volume on the x-axis and the solution's pH value on the y-axis. The pH of the solution always goes up as the base is added to the solution.

Example: Diprotic acid
For each diprotic acid titration curve, from left to right, there are two midpoints, two equivalence points, and two buffer regions.

Equivalence points
Due to the successive dissociation processes, there are two equivalence points in the titration curve of a diprotic acid. The first equivalence point occurs when all first protons from the first ionization are titrated. In other words, the amount of OH− added equals the original amount of H2A at the first equivalence point. The second equivalence point occurs when all protons are titrated. Therefore, the amount of OH− added equals twice the amount of H2A at this time. For a weak diprotic acid titrated by a strong base, the second equivalence point must occur at pH above 7 due to the hydrolysis of the resulted salts in the solution. At either equivalence point, adding a drop of base will cause the steepest rise of the pH value in the system.

Buffer regions and midpoints
A titration curve for a diprotic acid contains two midpoints where pH=pKa. Since there are two different Ka values, the first midpoint occurs at pH=pKa1 and the second one occurs at pH=pKa2. Each segment of the curve that contains a midpoint at its center is called the buffer region. Because the buffer regions consist of the acid and its conjugate base, it can resist pH changes when base is added until the next equivalent points.

Applications of acids
In industry
Acids are fundamental reagents in treating almost all processes in modern industry. Sulfuric acid, a diprotic acid, is the most widely used acid in industry, and is also the most-produced industrial chemical in the world. It is mainly used in producing fertilizer, detergent, batteries and dyes, as well as used in processing many products such like removing impurities. According to the statistics data in 2011, the annual production of sulfuric acid was around 200 million tonnes in the world. For example, phosphate minerals react with sulfuric acid to produce phosphoric acid for the production of phosphate fertilizers, and zinc is produced by dissolving zinc oxide into sulfuric acid, purifying the solution and electrowinning.
In the chemical industry, acids react in neutralization reactions to produce salts. For example, nitric acid reacts with ammonia to produce ammonium nitrate, a fertilizer. Additionally, carboxylic acids can be esterified with alcohols, to produce esters.
Acids are often used to remove rust and other corrosion from metals in a process known as pickling. They may be used as an electrolyte in a wet cell battery, such as sulfuric acid in a car battery.

In food
Tartaric acid is an important component of some commonly used foods like unripened mangoes and tamarind. Natural fruits and vegetables also contain acids. Citric acid is present in oranges, lemon and other citrus fruits. Oxalic acid is present in tomatoes, spinach, and especially in carambola and rhubarb; rhubarb leaves and unripe carambolas are toxic because of high concentrations of oxalic acid. Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) is an essential vitamin for the human body and is present in such foods as amla (Indian gooseberry), lemon, citrus fruits, and guava.
Many acids can be found in various kinds of food as additives, as they alter their taste and serve as preservatives. Phosphoric acid, for example, is a component of cola drinks. Acetic acid is used in day-to-day life as vinegar. Citric acid is used as a preservative in sauces and pickles.
Carbonic acid is one of the most common acid additives that are widely added in soft drinks. During the manufacturing process, CO2 is usually pressurized to dissolve in these drinks to generate carbonic acid. Carbonic acid is very unstable and tends to decompose into water and CO2 at room temperature and pressure. Therefore, when bottles or cans of these kinds of soft drinks are opened, the soft drinks fizz and effervesce as CO2 bubbles come out.
Certain acids are used as drugs. Acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin) is used as a pain killer and for bringing down fevers.

In human bodies
Acids play important roles in the human body. The hydrochloric acid present in the stomach aids digestion by breaking down large and complex food molecules. Amino acids are required for synthesis of proteins required for growth and repair of body tissues. Fatty acids are also required for growth and repair of body tissues. Nucleic acids are important for the manufacturing of DNA and RNA and transmitting of traits to offspring through genes. Carbonic acid is important for maintenance of pH equilibrium in the body.
Human bodies contain a variety of organic and inorganic compounds, among those dicarboxylic acids play an essential role in many biological behaviors. Many of those acids are amino acids, which mainly serve as materials for the synthesis of proteins. Other weak acids serve as buffers with their conjugate bases to keep the body's pH from undergoing large scale changes that would be harmful to cells. The rest of the dicarboxylic acids also participate in the synthesis of various biologically important compounds in human bodies.

Acid catalysis
Acids are used as catalysts in industrial and organic chemistry; for example, sulfuric acid is used in very large quantities in the alkylation process to produce gasoline.  Some acids, such as sulfuric, phosphoric, and hydrochloric acids, also effect dehydration and condensation reactions. In biochemistry, many enzymes employ acid catalysis.

Biological occurrence
Many biologically important molecules are acids. Nucleic acids, which contain acidic phosphate groups, include DNA and RNA. Nucleic acids contain the genetic code that determines many of an organism's characteristics, and is passed from parents to offspring. DNA contains the chemical blueprint for the synthesis of proteins, which are made up of amino acid subunits. Cell membranes contain fatty acid esters such as phospholipids.
An α-amino acid has a central carbon (the α or alpha carbon) that is covalently bonded to a carboxyl group (thus they are carboxylic acids), an amino group, a hydrogen atom and a variable group. The variable group, also called the R group or side chain, determines the identity and many of the properties of a specific amino acid. In glycine, the simplest amino acid, the R group is a hydrogen atom, but in all other amino acids it is contains one or more carbon atoms bonded to hydrogens, and may contain other elements such as sulfur, oxygen or nitrogen. With the exception of glycine, naturally occurring amino acids are chiral and almost invariably occur in the L-configuration. Peptidoglycan, found in some bacterial cell walls contains some D-amino acids. At physiological pH, typically around 7, free amino acids exist in a charged form, where the acidic carboxyl group (-COOH) loses a proton (-COO−) and the basic amine group (-NH2) gains a proton (-NH+3). The entire molecule has a net neutral charge and is a zwitterion, with the exception of amino acids with basic or acidic side chains. Aspartic acid, for example, possesses one protonated amine and two deprotonated carboxyl groups, for a net charge of −1 at physiological pH.
Fatty acids and fatty acid derivatives are another group of carboxylic acids that play a significant role in biology. These contain long hydrocarbon chains and a carboxylic acid group on one end. The cell membrane of nearly all organisms is primarily made up of a phospholipid bilayer, a micelle of hydrophobic fatty acid esters with polar, hydrophilic phosphate "head" groups. Membranes contain additional components, some of which can participate in acid–base reactions.
In humans and many other animals, hydrochloric acid is a part of the gastric acid secreted within the stomach to help hydrolyze proteins and polysaccharides, as well as converting the inactive pro-enzyme, pepsinogen into the enzyme, pepsin. Some organisms produce acids for defense; for example, ants produce formic acid.
Acid–base equilibrium plays a critical role in regulating mammalian breathing. Oxygen gas (O2) drives cellular respiration, the process by which animals release the chemical potential energy stored in food, producing carbon dioxide (CO2) as a byproduct. Oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged in the lungs, and the body responds to changing energy demands by adjusting the rate of ventilation. For example, during periods of exertion the body rapidly breaks down stored carbohydrates and fat, releasing CO2 into the blood stream. In aqueous solutions such as blood CO2 exists in equilibrium with carbonic acid and bicarbonate ion.

CO2 + H2O  ⇌  H2CO3  ⇌  H+ + HCO−3
It is the decrease in pH that signals the brain to breathe faster and deeper, expelling the excess CO2 and resupplying the cells with O2.

Cell membranes are generally impermeable to charged or large, polar molecules because of the lipophilic fatty acyl chains comprising their interior. Many biologically important molecules, including a number of pharmaceutical agents, are organic weak acids that can cross the membrane in their protonated, uncharged form but not in their charged form (i.e., as the conjugate base). For this reason the activity of many drugs can be enhanced or inhibited by the use of antacids or acidic foods. The charged form, however, is often more soluble in blood and cytosol, both aqueous environments. When the extracellular environment is more acidic than the neutral pH within the cell, certain acids will exist in their neutral form and will be membrane soluble, allowing them to cross the phospholipid bilayer. Acids that lose a proton at the intracellular pH will exist in their soluble, charged form and are thus able to diffuse through the cytosol to their target. Ibuprofen, aspirin and penicillin are examples of drugs that are weak acids.

Common acids
Mineral acids (inorganic acids)
Hydrogen halides and their solutions: hydrofluoric acid (HF), hydrochloric acid (HCl), hydrobromic acid (HBr), hydroiodic acid (HI)
Halogen oxoacids: hypochlorous acid (HClO), chlorous acid (HClO2), chloric acid (HClO3), perchloric acid (HClO4), and corresponding analogs for bromine and iodine
Hypofluorous acid (HFO), the only known oxoacid for fluorine.
Sulfuric acid (H2SO4)
Fluorosulfuric acid (HSO3F)
Nitric acid (HNO3)
Phosphoric acid (H3PO4)
Fluoroantimonic acid (HSbF6)
Fluoroboric acid (HBF4)
Hexafluorophosphoric acid (HPF6)
Chromic acid (H2CrO4)
Boric acid (H3BO3)

Sulfonic acids
A sulfonic acid has the general formula RS(=O)2–OH, where R is an organic radical.

Methanesulfonic acid (or mesylic acid, CH3SO3H)
Ethanesulfonic acid (or esylic acid, CH3CH2SO3H)
Benzenesulfonic acid (or besylic acid, C6H5SO3H)
p-Toluenesulfonic acid (or tosylic acid, CH3C6H4SO3H)
Trifluoromethanesulfonic acid (or triflic acid, CF3SO3H)
Polystyrene sulfonic acid (sulfonated polystyrene, [CH2CH(C6H4)SO3H]n)

Carboxylic acids
A carboxylic acid has the general formula R-C(O)OH, where R is an organic radical. The carboxyl group -C(O)OH contains a carbonyl group, C=O, and a hydroxyl group, O-H.

Acetic acid (CH3COOH)
Citric acid (C6H8O7)
Formic acid (HCOOH)
Gluconic acid HOCH2-(CHOH)4-COOH
Lactic acid (CH3-CHOH-COOH)
Oxalic acid (HOOC-COOH)
Tartaric acid (HOOC-CHOH-CHOH-COOH)

Halogenated carboxylic acids
Halogenation at alpha position increases acid strength, so that the following acids are all stronger than acetic acid.

Fluoroacetic acid
Trifluoroacetic acid
Chloroacetic acid
Dichloroacetic acid
Trichloroacetic acid

Vinylogous carboxylic acids
Normal carboxylic acids are the direct union of a carbonyl group and a hydroxyl group.  In vinylogous carboxylic acids, a carbon-carbon double bond separates the carbonyl and hydroxyl groups.

Ascorbic acid

Nucleic acids
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)

References
Listing of strengths of common acids and bases
Zumdahl, Steven S. (1997). Chemistry (4th ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 9780669417944.
Pavia, D. L.; Lampman, G. M.; Kriz, G. S. (2004). Organic Chemistry Volume I. Mason, OH: Cengage Learning. ISBN 0759347271.

External links
Curtipot: Acid–Base equilibria diagrams, pH calculation and titration curves simulation and analysis – freeware

================================================================================

# Actinide chemistry

Actinide chemistry (or actinoid chemistry) is one of the main branches of nuclear chemistry that investigates the processes and molecular systems of the actinides. The actinides derive their name from the group 3 element actinium. The informal chemical symbol An is used in general discussions of actinide chemistry to refer to any actinide. All but one of the actinides are f-block elements, corresponding to the filling of the 5f electron shell; lawrencium, a d-block element, is also generally considered an actinide. In comparison with the lanthanides, also mostly f-block elements, the actinides show much more variable valence. The actinide series encompasses the 15 metallic chemical elements with atomic numbers from 89 to 103, actinium through lawrencium.

Main branches
Organoactinide chemistry
In contrast to the relatively early flowering of organotransition-metal chemistry (1955 to the present), the corresponding development of actinide organometallic chemistry has taken place largely within the past 15 or so years. During this period, 5f organometallic science has blossomed, and it is now apparent that the actinides have a rich, intricate, and highly informative organometallic chemistry. Intriguing parallels to and sharp differences from the d-block elements have emerged. Actinides can coordinate the organic active groups or bind to carbon by the covalent bonds.

Thermodynamics of actinides
The necessity of obtaining accurate thermodynamic quantities for the actinide elements and their compounds was recognized at the outset of the Manhattan Project, when a dedicated team of scientists and engineers initiated the program to exploit nuclear energy for military purposes. Since the end of World War II, both fundamental and applied objectives have motivated a great deal of further study of actinide thermodynamics.

Nanotechnology and supramolecular chemistry of actinides
The possibility of using unique properties of lanthanides in the nanotechnology is demonstrated. The origination of linear and nonlinear optical properties of lanthanide compounds with phthalocyanines, porphyrins, naphthalocyanines, and their analogs in solutions and condensed state and the prospects of obtaining novel materials on their basis are discussed. Based on the electronic structure and properties of lanthanides and their compounds, namely, optical and magnetic characteristics, electronic and ionic conductivity, and fluctuating valence, molecular engines are classified. High-speed storage engines or memory storage engines; photoconversion molecular engines based on Ln(II) and Ln(III); electrochemical molecular engines involving silicate and phosphate glasses; molecular engines whose operation is based on insulator – semiconductor, semiconductor – metal, and metal – superconductor types of conductivity phase transitions; solid electrolyte molecular engines; and miniaturized molecular engines for medical analysis are distinguished. It is shown that thermodynamically stable nanoparticles of LnxMy composition can be formed by d elements of the second halves of the series, i.e., those arranged after M = Mn, Tc, and Re.

Biological and environmental chemistry of actinides
Generally, ingested insoluble actinide compounds such as high-fired uranium dioxide and mixed oxide (MOX) fuel will pass through the digestive system with little effect since they cannot dissolve and be absorbed by the body. Inhaled actinide compounds, however, will be more damaging as they remain in the lungs and irradiate the lung tissue. Ingested Low-fired oxides and soluble salts such as nitrate can be absorbed into the blood stream. If they are inhaled then it is possible for the solid to dissolve and leave the lungs. Hence the dose to the lungs will be lower for the soluble form.
Radon and radium are not actinides—they are both radioactive daughters from the decay of uranium. Aspects of their biology and environmental behaviour is discussed at radium in the environment.

In India, a large amount of thorium ore can be found in the form of monazite in placer deposits of the Western and Eastern coastal dune sands, particularly in the Tamil Nadu coastal areas. The residents of this area are exposed to a naturally occurring radiation dose ten times higher than the worldwide average.
Thorium has been linked to liver cancer. In the past thoria (thorium dioxide) was used as a contrast agent for medical X-ray radiography but its use has been discontinued. It was sold under the name Thorotrast.
Uranium is about as abundant as arsenic or molybdenum. Significant concentrations of uranium occur in some substances such as phosphate rock deposits, and minerals such as lignite, and monazite sands in uranium-rich ores (it is recovered commercially from these sources). 
Seawater contains about 3.3 parts per billion of uranium by weight as uranium(VI) forms soluble carbonate complexes. The extraction of uranium from seawater has been considered as a means of obtaining the element. Because of the very low specific activity of uranium the chemical effects of it upon living things can often outweigh the effects of its radioactivity.
Plutonium, like other actinides, readily forms a plutonium dioxide (plutonyl) core (PuO2). In the environment, this plutonyl core readily complexes with carbonate as well as other oxygen moieties (OH−, NO−2, NO−3, and SO2−4) to form charged complexes which can be readily mobile with low affinities to soil.

Nuclear reactions
Some early evidence for nuclear fission was the formation of a short-lived radioisotope of barium which was isolated from neutron irradiated uranium (139Ba, with a half-life of 83 minutes and 140Ba, with a half-life of 12.8 days, are major fission products of uranium). At the time, it was thought that this was a new radium isotope, as it was then standard radiochemical practice to use a barium sulfate carrier precipitate to assist in the isolation of radium.

PUREX
The PUREX process is a liquid–liquid extraction ion-exchange method used to reprocess spent nuclear fuel, in order to extract primarily uranium and plutonium, independent of each other, from the other constituents. The current method of choice is to use the PUREX liquid–liquid extraction process which uses a tributyl phosphate/hydrocarbon mixture to extract both uranium and plutonium from nitric acid. This extraction is of the nitrate salts and is classed as being of a solvation mechanism. For example, the extraction of plutonium by an extraction agent (S) in a nitrate medium occurs by the following reaction.

Pu4+(aq) + 4 NO−3(aq) + 2 S(organic) → [Pu(NO3)4S2](organic)
A complex bond is formed between the metal cation, the nitrates and the tributyl phosphate, and a model compound of a dioxouranium(VI) complex with two nitrates and two triethyl phosphates has been characterised by X-ray crystallography. After the dissolution step it is normal to remove the fine insoluble solids, because otherwise they will disturb the solvent extraction process by altering the liquid-liquid interface. It is known that the presence of a fine solid can stabilize an emulsion. Emulsions are often referred to as third phases in the solvent extraction community.
An organic solvent composed of 30% tributyl phosphate (TBP) in a hydrocarbon solvent, such as kerosene, is used to extract the uranium as UO2(NO3)2·2TBP complexes, and plutonium as similar complexes, from other fission products, which remain in the aqueous phase. The transuranium elements americium and curium also remain in the aqueous phase. The nature of the organic soluble uranium complex has been the subject of some research. A series of complexes of uranium with nitrate and trialkyl phosphates and phosphine oxides have been characterized.
Plutonium is separated from uranium by treating the kerosene solution with aqueous ferrous sulphamate, which selectively reduces the plutonium to the +3 oxidation state. The plutonium passes into the aqueous phase. The uranium is stripped from the kerosene solution by back-extraction into nitric acid at a concentration of ca. 0.2 mol dm−3.

See also
Nuclear chemistry
Actinides in the environment
Important publications in nuclear chemistry

== References ==

================================================================================

# Agricultural chemistry

Agricultural chemistry is the chemistry, especially organic chemistry and biochemistry, as they relate to agriculture.   Agricultural chemistry embraces the structures and chemical reactions relevant in the production, protection, and use of crops and livestock. Its applied science and technology aspects are directed towards increasing yields and improving quality, which comes with multiple advantages and disadvantages.

Agricultural and environmental chemistry
This aspect of agricultural chemistry deals with the role of molecular chemistry in agriculture as well as the negative consequences.

Plant biochemistry
Plant biochemistry encompasses the chemical reactions that occur within plants. In principle, knowledge at a molecular level informs technologies for providing food. Particular focus is on the biochemical differences between plants and other organisms as well as the differences within the plant kingdom, such as dicotyledons vs  monocotyledons, gymnosperms vs angiosperms, C2- vs C4-fixers, etc.

Pesticides
Chemical materials developed to assist in the production of food, feed, and fiber include herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, and other pesticides. Pesticides are chemicals that play an important role in increasing crop yield and mitigating crop losses. These work to keep insects and other animals away from crops to allow them to grow undisturbed, effectively regulating pests and diseases.
Disadvantages of pesticides include contamination of the ground and water (see persistent organic pollutants). They may be toxic to non-target species, including birds, fish, pollinators,  as well as the farmworkers themselves.

Soil chemistry
Agricultural chemistry often aims at preserving or increasing the fertility of soil with the goals of maintaining or improving the agricultural yield and improving the quality of the crop.  Soils are analyzed with attention to the inorganic matter (minerals), which comprise most of the mass of dry soil, and organic matter, which consists of living organisms, their degradation products, humic acids and fulvic acids. 
Fertilizers are a major consideration.  While organic fertilizers are time-honored, their use has largely been displaced by chemicals produced from mining (phosphate rock) and the Haber-Bosch process.  The use of these materials dramatically increased the rate at which crops are produced, which is able to support the growing human population.  Common fertilizers include urea, ammonium sulphate, diammonium phosphate, and calcium ammonium phosphate.

Biofuels and bio-derived materials
Agricultural chemistry encompasses the science and technology of producing not only edible crops, but feedstocks for fuels ("biofuels") and materials.  Ethanol fuel obtained by fermentation of sugars.  Biodiesel is derived from fats, both animal- and plant-derived.  Methane can be recovered from manure and other ag wastes by microbial action.  Lignocellulose is a promising precursor to new materials.

Biotechnology
Biocatalysis is used to produce a number of food products.  More than five billion tons of high fructose corn syrup are produced annually by the action of the immobilized enzyme glucose isomerase of corn-derived glucose.  Emerging technologies are numerous, including enzymes for clarifying or debittering of fruit juices.  
A variety of potentially useful chemicals are obtained by engineered plants. Bioremediation is a green route to biodegradation.

GMOs
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO's) are plants or living things that have been altered at a genomic level by scientists to improve the organisms characteristics. These characteristics include providing new vaccines for humans, increasing nutrients supplies, and creating unique plastics. They may also be able to grow in climates that are typically not suitable for the original organism to grow in. Examples of GMO's include virus resistant tobacco and squash, delayed ripening tomatoes, and herbicide resistant soybeans.
GMO's came with an increased interest in using biotechnology to produce fertilizer and pesticides. Due to an increased market interest in biotechnology in the 1970s, there was more technology and infrastructure developed, a decreased cost, and an advance in research. Since the early 1980s, genetically-modified crops have been incorporated. Increased biotechnological work calls for the union of biology and chemistry to produce improved crops, a main reason behind this being the increasing amount of food needed to feed a growing population.
That being said, concerns with GMO's include potential antibiotic resistance from eating a GMO. There are also concerns about the long term effects on the human body since many GMO's were recently developed.
Much controversy surrounds GMO's. In the United States, all foods containing GMO's must be labeled as such.

Omics
Particularly relevant is proteomics as protein (nutrition) guides much of agriculture.

See also
Agronomy
Food science

== Notes and references ==

================================================================================

# Biological oceanography

Biological oceanography  is the study of how organisms affect and are affected by the physics, chemistry, and geology of the oceanographic system. Biological oceanography may also be referred to as ocean ecology, in which the root word of ecology is Oikos (oικoσ), meaning ‘house’ or ‘habitat’ in Greek. With that in mind, it is of no surprise then that the main focus of biological oceanography is on the microorganisms within the ocean; looking at how they are affected by their environment and how that affects larger marine creatures and their ecosystem. Biological oceanography is similar to marine biology, but is different because of the perspective used to study the ocean. Biological oceanography takes a bottom-up approach (in terms of the food web), while marine biology studies the ocean from a top-down perspective. Biological oceanography mainly focuses on the ecosystem of the ocean with an emphasis on plankton: their diversity (morphology, nutritional sources, motility, and metabolism); their productivity and how that plays a role in the global carbon cycle; and their distribution (predation and life cycle).

History
In 325 BC, Pytheas of Massalia, a Greek geographer, explored much of the coast of England and Norway and developed the means of determining latitude from the declination of the North Star. His account of tides is also one of the earliest accounts that suggest a relationship between them and the moon. This relationship was later developed by English monk Bede in De Temporum Ratione (The Reckoning of Time) around 700 AD.
Understanding the ocean began with the general exploration and voyaging for trade. Some notable events closer to our time, include Prince Henry the Navigator’s ocean exploration in the 1400s. In 1513, Ponce de Leon described the Florida Current. In 1674, Robert Boyle investigated the relationship between salinity, temperature, and pressure in the depths of the ocean. Captain James Cook’s voyages were responsible for the extensive data collection on geography, geology, biota, currents, tides, and water temperatures of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans in the 1760s and 1770s. In 1820, Alexander Marcet noted the varying chemical composition of seawater in the different oceans. Not long after, in 1843, Edward Forbes, a British naturalist, stated that marine organisms could not exist deeper than 300 fathoms (even though many had already collected organisms much deeper, many followed Forbes' influence). Forbes’ theory was finally believed to be incorrect by the masses when submarine cable was lifted from a depth of 1830 m and covered in animals. This finding began the plans for the Challenger Expedition.
The Challenger Expedition was pivotal to biological oceanography and oceanography in general. The Challenger Expedition was headed by Charles Wyville Thomson in 1872–1876. The expedition also included two other naturalists, Henry N. Moseley and John Murray. Before the expedition, the ocean was, although interesting to many, considered an unpredictable and mostly life-less body of water, and this expedition made them rethink this stance on the ocean This expedition was at the behest of The Royal Society to see if they would be able to lay cables at the bottom of the ocean. They also brought the equipment to collect data about the biological, chemical, and geological properties of the ocean in a systematic way. They mapped the oceanic sediment and collected data The data collected in this voyage proved that there was life in deep waters (5500 meters) and that the composition of water in the ocean is consistent. The success of the Challenger Expedition led to many more expeditions by the Germans, French, US, and other British explorers.

Motivation
Oceans occupy about 71% of the Earth's surface. Whilst the average depth of the oceans is about 3800 m, the deepest parts are almost 11000 m. The marine environment has a total volume (approximately 1.37 billion km3) that is 300 times larger for life than the volume of land and freshwater combined. It is thought that the earliest organisms originated in the ancient oceans, long before any forms of life appeared on land. Ocean biology is dominated by organisms that are fundamentally different from organisms on land and the time scales of the ocean are much different than the atmosphere (whilst the atmosphere exchanges globally every 3 weeks, the ocean can take 1000 years). For these reasons we cannot make assumptions about ocean life based on what we know from land and atmospheric models. The range of diversity of life in the ocean is one of the main motivations behind the continued study of biological oceanography. Such a range in diversity means there is a need for a range of equipment and tools used to study diversity. With the ocean organisms being much more inaccessible and not easily observable (relative to terrestrial organisms), there is a slower growth of knowledge and a consistent need for further exploration and study.
The second main motivation behind the continued study of biological oceanography is climate change. Biological oceanography ties closely with physical and chemical oceanography and the details we learn from biological oceanography tell us information about the bigger picture and help us build models of larger-scale processes. Such models are even more critical when the global environment is changing at an unprecedented rate. There are global patterns in environmental conditions, such as changes in pH, temperature, salinity, and CO2, but not everywhere sees the same change. The ocean makes the earth habitable through regulation of the Earth's climate and processes such as primary production which provide oxygen as a byproduct. Biology is central to facilitating some of these processes but with climate change and human impacts, the ocean environment is constantly changing and so calls for consistent and continued research.
Some of the main questions that biological oceanographers seek to answer may include: what sorts of organisms inhabit different sectors and depths of the ocean and why? A lot of biological oceanographic research studies the production of organic matter by ocean life and examines what factors affect their growth, and as a result the production rates of organic matter. Some biological oceanographers look at the relationships between organisms themselves, all the way from microbes to whales, and some look at the relationships between certain organisms and the chemical or physical characteristics of the ocean. Biological oceanographers also seek to answer questions with a more direct and immediate impact on humans- such as asking what we can expect to harvest from the sea, and answering how the weather, seasons, or recent natural disasters may affect the fisheries’ harvest. Some of the main questions at the moment and for the future is looking at how climate change will affect the ocean biota.

See also
Marine life – Organisms that live in salt water
Marine microorganism – Any life form too small for the naked human eye to see that lives in a marine environmentPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Oceanography – Study of physical, chemical, and biological processes in the ocean
Phytoplankton – Autotrophic members of the plankton ecosystem
Zooplankton – Heterotrophic protistan or metazoan members of the plankton ecosystem
Physical Oceanography – Study of physical conditions and processes within the oceanPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Chemical Oceanography – Chemistry of oceans and seasPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Climate Change – Human-caused changes to climate on EarthPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Marine plastic pollution – Environmental pollution by plastics
Planktology – Study of plankton

References
External links
 Media related to Biological oceanography at Wikimedia Commons

================================================================================

# Alexander Marcet

Alexander John Gaspard Marcet FRS (1 August 1770 – 19 October 1822),  was a Genevan-born physician who became a British citizen in 1800. His wife Jane Marcet was a prolific author, whose series of books entitled 'Conversations' treated topics such as chemistry, botany, religion and economics.

Biography
Marcet was born at Geneva, and received his school education there. In 1794 he went to the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated with an MD on 24 June 1797. He wrote a thesis on diabetes, printed at Edinburgh in the same year. He then took a house in London, worked as assistant physician at Cary Street Dispensary, and was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 25 June 1799. He then became a physician at Finsbury Dispensary, and at Guy's Hospital on 18 April 1804. He lectured there on chemistry between 1805 and 1819.
Marcet took charge of the temporary military hospital at Portsmouth in 1809 for some months, when it contained invalids from Walcheren. He had married Jane Haldimand (see Jane Marcet), lived in Russell Square, and, as he grew wealthier, grew less and less inclined for medical practice.
He retired from the staff of Guy's Hospital, 10 March 1819, and went to live in Geneva, where he was appointed honorary professor of chemistry. He visited England in 1821, and died in Great Coram Street, London, 19 October 1822. His grandson was William Marcet, FRS.

Works
In 1805, Marcet contributed an essay, A Chemical Account of the Brighton Chalybeate, to a new edition of the Treatise on Mineral Waters of his colleague, William Saunders. This was also published in the same year as a pamphlet. He describes a variety of experiments of the rudimentary chemistry of that period made with the water of a chalybeate spring called the Wick, and shows that, unlike the Tonbridge spa, it might be drunk warm without any precipitation of iron.
He was elected Fellow of the Royal Society in 1815, and published some chemical papers in the Philosophical Transactions. He published in 1817 An Essay on the Chemical History and Medical Treatment of Calculous Disorders. He complains that he was unable to give full statistics, as no major London hospital then kept any regular record of cases. He was probably the first to remark that the pain of a renal calculus is often due to its passage down a ureter, and that it may grow in the kidney without the patient suffering acutely at all. For Rees's Cyclopædia he contributed articles on chemistry, but the topics are not known.

References
Attribution
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Moore, Norman (1893). "Marcet, Alexander John Gaspard". In Lee, Sidney (ed.). Dictionary of National Biography. Vol. 36. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

External links
 Works by or about Alexander Marcet at Wikisource

================================================================================

# Bede

Bede (; Old English: Bēda [ˈbeːdɑ]; 672/3 – 26 May 735), also known as Saint Bede, Bede of Jarrow, the Venerable Bede, and Bede the Venerable (Latin: Beda Venerabilis), was an English monk, author and scholar. He was one of the most known writers during the Early Middle Ages, and his most famous work, Ecclesiastical History of the English People, gained him the title "The Father of English History". He served at the monastery of St Peter and its companion monastery of St Paul in the Kingdom of Northumbria of the Angles.
Born on lands belonging to the twin monastery of Monkwearmouth–Jarrow in present-day Tyne and Wear, England, Bede was sent to Monkwearmouth at the age of seven and later joined Abbot Ceolfrith at Jarrow. Both of them survived a plague that struck in 686 and killed the majority of the population there. While Bede spent most of his life in the monastery, he travelled to several abbeys and monasteries across the British Isles, even visiting the archbishop of York and King Ceolwulf of Northumbria.
His theological writings were extensive and included a number of Biblical commentaries and other works of exegetical erudition. Another important area of study for Bede was the academic discipline of computus, otherwise known to his contemporaries as the science of calculating calendar dates. One of the more important dates Bede tried to compute was Easter, an effort that was mired in controversy. He also helped to popularise the practice of dating forward from the birth of Christ (Anno Domini—in the year of our Lord), a practice which eventually became commonplace in medieval Europe. He is considered by many historians to be the most important scholar of antiquity for the period between the death of Pope Gregory I in 604 and the coronation of Charlemagne in 800.
In 1899 Pope Leo XIII declared him a Doctor of the Church. He is the first native of Great Britain to achieve this designation. Bede was moreover a skilled linguist and translator, and his work made the Greek and Latin writings of the early Church Fathers much more accessible to his fellow Anglo-Saxons, which contributed significantly to English Christianity. Bede's monastery had access to a library that included works by Eusebius, Orosius, and many others.

Life
Childhood
Almost everything that is known of Bede's life is contained in the last chapter of his Ecclesiastical History of the English People, a history of the church in England. It was completed in about 731, and Bede implies that he was then in his fifty-ninth year, which would give a birth date in 672 or 673. A minor source of information is the letter by his disciple Cuthbert (not to be confused with the saint, Cuthbert, who is mentioned in Bede's work) which relates Bede's death. Bede, in the Historia, gives his birthplace as "on the lands of this monastery". He is referring to the twin monasteries of Monkwearmouth and Jarrow, in modern-day Wearside and Tyneside respectively. There is also a tradition that he was born at Monkton, two miles (3.2 km) from the site where the monastery at Jarrow was later built. Bede says nothing of his origins, but his connections with men of noble ancestry suggest that his own family was well-to-do. Bede's first abbot was Benedict Biscop, and the names "Biscop" and "Beda" both appear in a list of the kings of Lindsey from around 800, further suggesting that Bede came from a noble family.
Bede's name reflects West Saxon Bīeda (Anglian Bēda). It is an Old English short name formed on the root of bēodan "to bid, command".
The name also occurs in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, s.a. 501, as Bieda, one of the sons of the Saxon founder of Portsmouth. The Liber Vitae of Durham Cathedral names two priests with this name, one of whom is presumably Bede himself. Some manuscripts of the Life of Cuthbert, one of Bede's works, mention that Cuthbert's own priest was named Bede; it is possible that this priest is the other name listed in the Liber Vitae.
Bede's given name is likely a hypocorism, possibly from the Old English "Bēda," though its full form remains uncertain. It has been speculatively linked to the rare name "Bǣddan," but this etymology is unverified. The name's contraction follows a common Insular tradition of employing shortened forms for monastic figures.

Boyhood
At the age of seven, Bede was sent as a puer oblatus to the monastery of Monkwearmouth by his family to be educated by Benedict Biscop and later by Ceolfrith. Bede does not say whether it was already intended at that point that he would be a monk. 
It was fairly common in Ireland at this time for young boys, particularly those of noble birth, to be fostered out as an oblate; the practice was also likely to have been common among the Germanic peoples in England. Monkwearmouth's sister monastery at Jarrow was founded by Ceolfrith in 682, and Bede probably transferred to Jarrow with Ceolfrith that year.
The dedication stone for the church has survived as of 1969; it is dated 23 April 685, and as Bede would have been required to assist with menial tasks in his day-to-day life it is possible that he helped in building the original church. In 686, plague broke out at Jarrow. The Life of Ceolfrith, written in about 710, records that only two surviving monks were capable of singing the full offices; one was Ceolfrith and the other a young boy, who according to the anonymous writer had been taught by Ceolfrith. The two managed to do the entire service of the liturgy until others could be trained. The young boy was almost certainly Bede, who would have been about 14.

Youth
When Bede was about 17 years old Adomnán, the abbot of Iona Abbey, visited Monkwearmouth and Jarrow. Bede would probably have met the abbot during this visit, and it may be that Adomnán sparked Bede's interest in the Easter dating controversy. 
In about 692, in Bede's nineteenth year, Bede was ordained a deacon by his diocesan bishop, John, who was Bishop of Hexham. The canonical age for the ordination of a deacon was 25; Bede's early ordination may mean that his abilities were considered exceptional, but it is also possible that the minimum age requirement was often disregarded. There might have been minor orders ranking below a deacon; but there is no record of whether Bede held any of these offices.

Adulthood
In Bede's thirtieth year (about 702), he became a priest, with the ordination again performed by Bishop John.
In about 701 Bede wrote his first works, the De Arte Metrica and De Schematibus et Tropis; both were intended for use in the classroom. He continued to write for the rest of his life, eventually completing over 60 books, most of which have survived. Not all his output can be easily dated, and Bede may have worked on some texts over a period of many years. His last surviving work is a letter to Ecgbert of York, a former student, written in 734. A 6th-century Greek and Latin manuscript of Acts of the Apostles that is believed to have been used by Bede survives and is now in the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford. It is known as the Codex Laudianus.
Bede may have worked on some of the Latin Bibles that were copied at Jarrow, one of which, the Codex Amiatinus, is now held by the Laurentian Library in Florence. Bede was a teacher as well as a writer; he enjoyed music and was said to be accomplished as a singer and as a reciter of poetry in the vernacular. It is possible that he suffered a speech impediment, but this depends on a phrase in the introduction to his verse life of St Cuthbert. Translations of this phrase differ, and it is uncertain whether Bede intended to say that he was cured of a speech problem, or merely that he was inspired by the saint's works.

In 708 some monks at Hexham accused Bede of having committed heresy in his work De Temporibus. The standard theological view of world history at the time was known as the Six Ages of the World; in his book, Bede calculated the age of the world for himself, rather than accepting the authority of Isidore of Seville, and came to the conclusion that Christ had been born 3,952 years after the creation of the world, rather than the figure of over 5,000 years that was commonly accepted by theologians. The accusation occurred in front of the bishop of Hexham, Wilfrid, who was present at a feast when some drunken monks made the accusation. Wilfrid did not respond to the accusation, but a monk present relayed the episode to Bede, who replied within a few days to the monk, writing a letter setting forth his defence and asking that the letter also be read to Wilfrid. Bede had another brush with Wilfrid, for the historian says that he met Wilfrid sometime between 706 and 709 and discussed Æthelthryth, the abbess of Ely. Wilfrid had been present at the exhumation of her body in 695, and Bede questioned the bishop about the exact circumstances of the body and asked for more details of her life, as Wilfrid had been her advisor.
One further oddity in his writings is that in one of his works, the Commentary on the Seven Catholic Epistles, he writes in a manner that gives the impression he was married. The section in question is the only one in that work that is written in first-person view. Bede says: "Prayers are hindered by the conjugal duty because as often as I perform what is due to my wife I am not able to pray." Another passage, in the Commentary on Luke, also mentions a wife in the first person: "Formerly I possessed a wife in the lustful passion of desire and now I possess her in honourable sanctification and true love of Christ." The historian Benedicta Ward argued that these passages are Bede employing a rhetorical device.

Final years
In 733 Bede travelled to York to visit Ecgbert, who was then Bishop of York. The See of York was elevated to an archbishopric in 735, and it is likely that Bede and Ecgbert discussed the proposal for the elevation during his visit. Bede hoped to visit Ecgbert again in 734 but was too ill to make the journey. Bede also travelled to the monastery of Lindisfarne and at some point visited the otherwise unknown monastery of a monk named Wicthed, a visit that is mentioned in a letter to that monk. Because of his widespread correspondence with others throughout the British Isles, and because many of the letters imply that Bede had met his correspondents, it is likely that Bede travelled to some other places, although nothing further about timing or locations can be guessed.
It seems certain that he did not visit Rome, however, as he did not mention it in the autobiographical chapter of his Historia Ecclesiastica. Nothhelm, a correspondent of Bede's who assisted him by finding documents for him in Rome, is known to have visited Bede, though the date cannot be determined beyond the fact that it was after Nothhelm's visit to Rome. Except for a few visits to other monasteries, his life was spent in a round of prayer, observance of the monastic discipline and study of the Sacred Scriptures. He was considered the most learned man of his time.

Bede died at Jarrow on the Feast of the Ascension, 26 May 735 and was buried there. Cuthbert, a disciple of Bede's, wrote a letter to a Cuthwin (of whom nothing else is known), describing Bede's last days and his death. According to Cuthbert, Bede fell ill, "with frequent attacks of breathlessness but almost without pain", before Easter. On the Tuesday, two days before Bede died, his breathing became worse and his feet swelled. He continued to dictate to a scribe, however, and despite spending the night awake in prayer he dictated again the following day.
At three o'clock, according to Cuthbert, he asked for a box of his to be brought and distributed among the priests of the monastery "a few treasures" of his: "some pepper, and napkins, and some incense". That night he dictated a final sentence to the scribe, a boy named Wilberht, and died soon afterwards. The account of Cuthbert does not make entirely clear whether Bede died before midnight or after. However, by the reckoning of Bede's time, passage from the old day to the new occurred at sunset, not midnight, and Cuthbert is clear that he died after sunset. Thus, while his box was brought at three o'clock Wednesday afternoon of 25 May, by the time of the final dictation it was considered 26 May, although it might still have been 25 May in modern usage.
Cuthbert's letter also relates a five-line poem in the vernacular that Bede composed on his deathbed, known as "Bede's Death Song". It is the most-widely copied Old English poem and appears in 45 manuscripts, but its attribution to Bede is not certain—not all manuscripts name Bede as the author, and the ones that do are of later origin than those that do not. Bede's remains may have been translated to Durham Cathedral in the 11th century; his tomb there was looted in 1541, but the contents were probably re-interred in the Galilee chapel at the cathedral.

Works
Bede wrote scientific, historical and theological works, reflecting the range of his writings from music and metrics to exegetical Scripture commentaries. He knew patristic literature, as well as Pliny the Elder, Virgil, Lucretius, Ovid, Horace and other classical writers. He knew some Greek. Bede's scriptural commentaries employed the allegorical method of interpretation, and his history includes accounts of miracles, which to modern historians has seemed at odds with his critical approach to the materials in his history. Modern studies have shown the important role such concepts played in the world-view of early medieval scholars. Although Bede is mainly studied as a historian now, in his time his works on grammar, chronology, and biblical studies were as important as his historical and hagiographical works. The non-historical works contributed greatly to the Carolingian Renaissance. He has been credited with writing a penitential, though his authorship of this work is disputed.

Ecclesiastical History of the English People
Bede's best-known work is the Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum, or An Ecclesiastical History of the English People, completed in about 731. Bede was aided in writing this book by Albinus, abbot of St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury. The first of the five books begins with some geographical background and then sketches the history of England, beginning with Caesar's invasion in 55 BC. A brief account of Christianity in Roman Britain, including the martyrdom of St Alban, is followed by the story of Augustine's mission to England in 597, which brought Christianity to the Anglo-Saxons.
The second book begins with the death of Gregory the Great in 604 and follows the further progress of Christianity in Kent and the first attempts to evangelise Northumbria. These ended in disaster when Penda, the pagan king of Mercia, killed the newly Christian Edwin of Northumbria at the Battle of Hatfield Chase in about 632. The setback was temporary, and the third book recounts the growth of Christianity in Northumbria under kings Oswald of Northumbria and Oswy. The climax of the third book is the account of the Council of Whitby, traditionally seen as a major turning point in English history. The fourth book begins with the consecration of Theodore as Archbishop of Canterbury and recounts Wilfrid's efforts to bring Christianity to the Kingdom of Sussex.
The fifth book brings the story up to Bede's day and includes an account of missionary work in Frisia and of the conflict with the British church over the correct dating of Easter. Bede wrote a preface for the work, in which he dedicates it to Ceolwulf, king of Northumbria. The preface mentions that Ceolwulf received an earlier draft of the book; presumably Ceolwulf knew enough Latin to understand it, and he may even have been able to read it. The preface makes it clear that Ceolwulf had requested the earlier copy, and Bede had asked for Ceolwulf's approval; this correspondence with the king indicates that Bede's monastery had connections among the Northumbrian nobility.

Sources
The monastery at Wearmouth-Jarrow had an excellent library. Both Benedict Biscop and Ceolfrith had acquired books from the Continent, and in Bede's day the monastery was a renowned centre of learning. It has been estimated that there were about 200 books in the monastic library.
For the period prior to Augustine's arrival in 597, Bede drew on earlier writers, including Gaius Julius Solinus. He had access to two works of Eusebius: the Historia Ecclesiastica, and also the Chronicon, though he had neither in the original Greek; instead he had a Latin translation of the Historia, by Rufinus, and Jerome's translation of the Chronicon. He also knew Orosius's Adversus Paganus, and Gregory of Tours' Historia Francorum, both Christian histories, as well as the work of Eutropius, a pagan historian. He used Constantius of Lyon's Life of Germanus as a source for Germanus of Auxerre's visits to Britain.
Bede's account of the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain is drawn largely from Gildas's De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae. Bede would also have been familiar with more recent accounts such as Stephen of Ripon's Life of Wilfrid, and the anonymously written Life of Gregory the Great and Life of Cuthbert. He also drew on Josephus's Antiquities, and the works of Cassiodorus, and there was a copy of the Liber Pontificalis in Bede's monastery. Bede quotes from several classical authors, including Cicero, Plautus, and Terence, but he may have had access to their work via a Latin grammar rather than directly. However, it is clear he was familiar with the works of Virgil and with Pliny the Elder's Natural History, and his monastery also owned copies of the works of Dionysius Exiguus.
He probably drew his account of Alban from a life of that saint which has not survived. He acknowledges two other lives of saints directly; one is a life of Fursa, and the other of Æthelburh; the latter no longer survives. He also had access to a life of Ceolfrith. Some of Bede's material came from oral traditions, including a description of the physical appearance of Paulinus of York, who had died nearly 90 years before Bede's Historia Ecclesiastica was written.
Bede had correspondents who supplied him with material. Albinus, the abbot of the monastery in Canterbury, provided much information about the church in Kent, and with the assistance of Nothhelm, at that time a priest in London, obtained copies of Gregory the Great's correspondence from Rome relating to Augustine's mission. Almost all of Bede's information regarding Augustine is taken from these letters. Bede acknowledged his correspondents in the preface to the Historia Ecclesiastica; he was in contact with Bishop Daniel of Winchester, for information about the history of the church in Wessex and also wrote to the monastery at Lastingham for information about Cedd and Chad of Mercia. Bede also mentions an Abbot Esi as a source for the affairs of the East Anglian church, and Bishop Cynibert for information about Lindsey.
The historian Walter Goffart argues that Bede based the structure of the Historia on three works, using them as the framework around which the three main sections of the work were structured. For the early part of the work, up until the Gregorian mission, Goffart feels that Bede used De excidio. The second section, detailing the Gregorian mission of Augustine of Canterbury was framed on Life of Gregory the Great written at Whitby. The last section, detailing events after the Gregorian mission, Goffart feels was modelled on Life of Wilfrid. Most of Bede's informants for information after Augustine's mission came from the eastern part of Britain, leaving significant gaps in the knowledge of the western areas, which were those areas likely to have a native Briton presence.

Models and style
Bede's stylistic models included some of the same authors from whom he drew the material for the earlier parts of his history. His introduction imitates the work of Orosius, and his title is an echo of Eusebius's Historia Ecclesiastica. Bede also followed Eusebius in taking the Acts of the Apostles as the model for the overall work: where Eusebius used the Acts as the theme for his description of the development of the church, Bede made it the model for his history of the Anglo-Saxon church. Bede quoted his sources at length in his narrative, as Eusebius had done. Bede also appears to have taken quotes directly from his correspondents at times. For example, he almost always uses the terms "Australes" and "Occidentales" for the South and West Saxons respectively, but in a passage in the first book he uses "Meridiani" and "Occidui" instead, as perhaps his informant had done. At the end of the work, Bede adds a brief autobiographical note; this was an idea taken from Gregory of Tours' earlier History of the Franks.
Bede's work as a hagiographer and his detailed attention to dating were both useful preparations for the task of writing the Historia Ecclesiastica. His interest in computus, the science of calculating the date of Easter, was also useful in the account he gives of the controversy between the British and Anglo-Saxon church over the correct method of obtaining the Easter date.
Bede is described by Michael Lapidge as "without question the most accomplished Latinist produced in these islands in the Anglo-Saxon period". His Latin has been praised for its clarity, but his style in the Historia Ecclesiastica is not simple. He knew rhetoric and often used figures of speech and rhetorical forms which cannot easily be reproduced in translation, depending as they often do on the connotations of the Latin words. However, unlike contemporaries such as Aldhelm, whose Latin is full of difficulties, Bede's own text is easy to read. In the words of Charles Plummer, one of the best-known editors of the Historia Ecclesiastica, Bede's Latin is "clear and limpid ... it is very seldom that we have to pause to think of the meaning of a sentence ... Alcuin rightly praises Bede for his unpretending style."

Intent
Bede's primary intention in writing the Historia Ecclesiastica was to show the growth of the united church throughout England. The native Britons, whose Christian church survived the departure of the Romans, earn Bede's ire for refusing to help convert the Anglo-Saxons; by the end of the Historia the English, and their church, are dominant over the Britons. This goal, of showing the movement towards unity, explains Bede's animosity towards the British method of calculating Easter: much of the Historia is devoted to a history of the dispute, including the final resolution at the Synod of Whitby in 664. Bede is also concerned to show the unity of the English, despite the disparate kingdoms that still existed when he was writing. He also wants to instruct the reader by spiritual example and to entertain, and to the latter end he adds stories about many of the places and people about which he wrote.
N. J. Higham argues that Bede designed his work to promote his reform agenda to Ceolwulf, the Northumbrian king. Bede painted a highly optimistic picture of the current situation in the Church, as opposed to the more pessimistic picture found in his private letters.
Bede's extensive use of miracles can prove difficult for readers who consider him a more or less reliable historian but do not accept the possibility of miracles. Yet both reflect an inseparable integrity and regard for accuracy and truth, expressed in terms both of historical events and of a tradition of Christian faith that continues. Bede, like Gregory the Great whom Bede quotes on the subject in the Historia, felt that faith brought about by miracles was a stepping stone to a higher, truer faith, and that as a result miracles had their place in a work designed to instruct.

Omissions and biases
Bede is somewhat reticent about the career of Wilfrid, a contemporary and one of the most prominent clerics of his day. This may be because Wilfrid's opulent lifestyle was uncongenial to Bede's monastic mind; it may also be that the events of Wilfrid's life, divisive and controversial as they were, simply did not fit with Bede's theme of the progression to a unified and harmonious church.
Bede's account of the early migrations of the Angles and Saxons to England omits any mention of a movement of those peoples across the English Channel from Britain to Brittany described by Procopius, who was writing in the sixth century. Frank Stenton describes this omission as "a scholar's dislike of the indefinite"; traditional material that could not be dated or used for Bede's didactic purposes had no interest for him.
Bede was a Northumbrian, and this tinged his work with a local bias. The sources to which he had access gave him less information about the west of England than for other areas. He says relatively little about the achievements of Mercia and Wessex, omitting, for example, any mention of Boniface, a West Saxon missionary to the continent of some renown and of whom Bede had almost certainly heard, though Bede does discuss Northumbrian missionaries to the continent. He is also parsimonious in his praise for Aldhelm, a West Saxon who had done much to convert the native Britons to the Roman form of Christianity. He lists seven kings of the Anglo-Saxons whom he regards as having held imperium, or overlordship; only one king of Wessex, Ceawlin, is listed as Bretwalda, and none from Mercia, though elsewhere he acknowledges the secular power several of the Mercians held. Historian Robin Fleming states that he was so hostile to Mercia because Northumbria had been diminished by Mercian power that he consulted no Mercian informants and included no stories about its saints.
Bede relates the story of Augustine's mission from Rome, and tells how the British clergy refused to assist Augustine in the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons. This, combined with Gildas's negative assessment of the British church at the time of the Anglo-Saxon invasions, led Bede to a very critical view of the native church. However, Bede ignores the fact that at the time of Augustine's mission, the history between the two was one of warfare and conquest, which, in the words of Barbara Yorke, would have naturally "curbed any missionary impulses towards the Anglo-Saxons from the British clergy."

Use of Anno Domini
At the time Bede wrote the Historia Ecclesiastica, there were two common ways of referring to dates. One was to use indictions, which were 15-year cycles, counting from 312 AD. There were three different varieties of indiction, each starting on a different day of the year. The other approach was to use regnal years—the reigning Roman emperor, for example, or the ruler of whichever kingdom was under discussion. This meant that in discussing conflicts between kingdoms, the date would have to be given in the regnal years of all the kings involved. Bede used both these approaches on occasion but adopted a third method as his main approach to dating: the Anno Domini method invented by Dionysius Exiguus. Although Bede did not invent this method, his adoption of it and his promulgation of it in De Temporum Ratione, his work on chronology, is the main reason it is now so widely used. Bede's Easter table, contained in De Temporum Ratione, was developed from Dionysius Exiguus' Easter table.

Assessment
The Historia Ecclesiastica was copied often in the Middle Ages, and about 160 manuscripts containing it survive. About half of those are located on the European continent, rather than in the British Isles. Most of the 8th- and 9th-century texts of Bede's Historia come from the northern parts of the Carolingian Empire. This total does not include manuscripts with only a part of the work, of which another 100 or so survive. It was printed for the first time between 1474 and 1482, probably at Strasbourg.
Modern historians have studied the Historia extensively, and several editions have been produced. For many years, early Anglo-Saxon history was essentially a retelling of the Historia, but recent scholarship has focused as much on what Bede did not write as what he did. The belief that the Historia was the culmination of Bede's works, the aim of all his scholarship, was a belief common among historians in the past but is no longer accepted by most scholars.
Modern historians and editors of Bede have been lavish in their praise of his achievement in the Historia Ecclesiastica. Stenton regards it as one of the "small class of books which transcend all but the most fundamental conditions of time and place", and regards its quality as dependent on Bede's "astonishing power of co-ordinating the fragments of information which came to him through tradition, the relation of friends, or documentary evidence ... In an age where little was attempted beyond the registration of fact, he had reached the conception of history." Patrick Wormald describes him as "the first and greatest of England's historians".
The Historia Ecclesiastica has given Bede a high reputation, but his concerns were different from those of a modern writer of history. His focus on the history of the organisation of the English church, and on heresies and the efforts made to root them out, led him to exclude the secular history of kings and kingdoms except where a moral lesson could be drawn or where they illuminated events in the church. Besides the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the medieval writers William of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntingdon and Geoffrey of Monmouth used his works as sources and inspirations. Early modern writers, such as Polydore Vergil and Matthew Parker, the Elizabethan Archbishop of Canterbury, also utilised the Historia, and his works were used by both Protestant and Catholic sides in the wars of religion.
Some historians have questioned the reliability of some of Bede's accounts. One historian, Charlotte Behr, thinks that the Historia's account of the arrival of the Germanic invaders in Kent should not be considered to relate what actually happened, but rather relates myths that were current in Kent during Bede's time.
It is likely that Bede's work, because it was so widely copied, discouraged others from writing histories and may even have led to the disappearance of manuscripts containing older historical works.

Other historical works
Chronicles
As Chapter 66 of his On the Reckoning of Time, in 725 Bede wrote the Greater Chronicle (chronica maiora), which sometimes circulated as a separate work. For recent events the Chronicle, like his Ecclesiastical History, relied upon Gildas, upon a version of the Liber Pontificalis current at least to the papacy of Pope Sergius I (687–701), and other sources. For earlier events he drew on Eusebius's Chronikoi Kanones. The dating of events in the Chronicle is inconsistent with his other works, using the era of creation, the Anno Mundi.

Hagiography
His other historical works included lives of the abbots of Wearmouth and Jarrow, as well as verse and prose lives of St Cuthbert, an adaptation of Paulinus of Nola's Life of St Felix, and a translation of the Greek Passion of St Anastasius. He also created a listing of saints, the Martyrology.

Theological works
In his own time, Bede was as well known for his biblical commentaries, and for his exegetical and other theological works. The majority of his writings were of this type and covered the Old Testament and the New Testament. Most survived the Middle Ages, but a few were lost. It was for his theological writings that he earned the title of Doctor Anglorum and why he was declared a saint. 

Bede first wrote commentaries on biblical books which previous patristic authors had not treated in depth, to his knowledge: 
On the Gospel of Mark, Commentary on Revelation, Commentary on the Catholic Epistles, Commentary on Acts, Reconsideration on the Books of Acts,; and from the Old Testament Commentary on Samuel, Commentary on Genesis, Commentaries on Ezra and Nehemiah, On the Temple, On the Tabernacle, Commentaries on Tobit, Commentaries on Proverbs, Commentaries on the Song of Songs, Commentaries on the Canticle of Habakkuk. The works on Ezra, the tabernacle and the temple were especially influenced by Gregory the Great's writings. He also wrote On the Gospel of Luke, and Homilies on the Gospels. 
Bede also wrote homilies, works written to explain theology used in worship services. He wrote homilies on the major Christian seasons such as Advent, Lent, or Easter, as well as on other subjects such as anniversaries of significant events.
Both types of Bede's theological works circulated widely in the Middle Ages. Several of his biblical commentaries were incorporated into the Glossa Ordinaria, an 11th-century collection of biblical commentaries. Some of Bede's homilies were collected by Paul the Deacon, and they were used in that form in the Monastic Office. Boniface used Bede's homilies in his missionary efforts on the continent.
At the time of his death he was working on a translation of the Gospel of John into English. He did this for the last 40 days of his life. When the last passage had been translated he said: "All is finished."

Sources
Bede synthesised and transmitted the learning from his predecessors, as well as made careful, judicious innovation in knowledge (such as recalculating the age of the Earth—for which he was censured before surviving the heresy accusations and eventually having his views championed by Archbishop Ussher in the sixteenth century—see below) that had theological implications. In order to do this, he learned Greek and attempted to learn Hebrew. He spent time reading and rereading both the Old and the New Testaments. He mentions that he studied from a text of Jerome's Vulgate, which itself was from the Hebrew text.
He also studied both the Latin and the Greek Fathers of the Church. In the monastic library at Jarrow were numerous books by theologians, including works by Basil of Caesarea, John Cassian, John Chrysostom, Isidore of Seville, Origen, Gregory of Nazianzus, Augustine of Hippo, Jerome, Pope Gregory I, Ambrose of Milan, Cassiodorus and Cyprian. He used these, in conjunction with the Biblical texts themselves, to write his commentaries and other theological works.
He had a Latin translation by Evagrius of Antioch of Athanasius's Life of Antony and a copy of Sulpicius Severus' Life of St Martin. He also used lesser known writers, such as Fulgentius of Ruspe, Julian of Eclanum, Ticonius and Prosper of Aquitaine. Bede was the first to refer to Jerome, Augustine, Pope Gregory and Ambrose as the four Latin Fathers of the Church. It is clear from Bede's own comments that he felt his calling was to explain to his students and readers the theology and thoughts of the Church Fathers.
Bede sometimes included in his theological books an acknowledgement of the predecessors on whose works he drew. In two cases he left instructions that his marginal notes, which gave the details of his sources, should be preserved by the copyist, and he may have originally added marginal comments about his sources to others of his works. Where he does not specify, it is still possible to identify books to which he must have had access by quotations that he uses. A full catalogue of the library available to Bede in the monastery cannot be reconstructed, but it is possible to tell, for example, that Bede was very familiar with the works of Virgil.
There is little evidence that he had access to any other of the pagan Latin writers—he quotes many of these writers, but the quotes are almost always found in the Latin grammars that were common in his day, one or more of which would certainly have been at the monastery. Another difficulty is that manuscripts of early writers were often incomplete: it is apparent that Bede had access to Pliny's Encyclopaedia, for example, but it seems that the version he had was missing book xviii, since he did not quote from it in his De temporum ratione.

Historical and astronomical chronology
De temporibus, or On Time, written in about 703, provides an introduction to the principles of Easter computus. This was based on parts of Isidore of Seville's Etymologies, and Bede also included a chronology of the world which was derived from Eusebius, with some revisions based on Jerome's translation of the Bible. In about 723, Bede wrote a longer work on the same subject, On the Reckoning of Time, which was influential throughout the Middle Ages. He also wrote several shorter letters and essays discussing specific aspects of computus.
On the Reckoning of Time (De temporum ratione) included an introduction to the traditional ancient and medieval view of the cosmos, including an explanation of how the spherical Earth influenced the changing length of daylight, of how the seasonal motion of the Sun and Moon influenced the changing appearance of the new moon at evening twilight. Bede also records the effect of the moon on tides. He shows that the twice-daily timing of tides is related to the Moon and that the lunar monthly cycle of spring and neap tides is also related to the Moon's position. He goes on to note that the times of tides vary along the same coast and that the water movements cause low tide at one place when there is high tide elsewhere. Since the focus of his book was the computus, Bede gave instructions for computing the date of Easter from the date of the Paschal full moon, for calculating the motion of the Sun and Moon through the zodiac, and for many other calculations related to the calendar. He gives some information about the months of the Anglo-Saxon calendar.
Any codex of Bede's Easter table is normally found together with a codex of his De temporum ratione. His Easter table, being an exact extension of Dionysius Exiguus' Paschal table and covering the time interval AD 532–1063, contains a 532-year Paschal cycle based on the so-called classical Alexandrian 19-year lunar cycle, being the close variant of bishop Theophilus' 19-year lunar cycle proposed by Annianus and adopted by bishop Cyril of Alexandria around AD 425. The ultimate similar (but rather different) predecessor of this Metonic 19-year lunar cycle is the one invented by Anatolius around AD 260.
For calendric purposes, Bede made a new calculation of the age of the world since the creation, which he dated as 3952 BC. Because of his innovations in computing the age of the world, he was accused of heresy at the table of Bishop Wilfrid, his chronology being contrary to accepted calculations. Once informed of the accusations of these "lewd rustics", Bede refuted them in his Letter to Plegwin.
In addition to these works on astronomical timekeeping, he also wrote De natura rerum, or On the Nature of Things, modelled in part after the work of the same title by Isidore of Seville. His works were so influential that late in the ninth century Notker the Stammerer, a monk of the Monastery of St Gall in Switzerland, wrote that "God, the orderer of natures, who raised the Sun from the East on the fourth day of Creation, in the sixth day of the world has made Bede rise from the West as a new Sun to illuminate the whole Earth".

Educational works
Bede wrote some works designed to help teach grammar in the abbey school. One of these was De arte metrica, a discussion of the composition of Latin verse, drawing on previous grammarians' work. It was based on Donatus's De pedibus and Servius's De finalibus and used examples from Christian poets as well as Virgil. It became a standard text for the teaching of Latin verse during the next few centuries. Bede dedicated this work to Cuthbert, apparently a student, for he is named "beloved son" in the dedication, and Bede says "I have laboured to educate you in divine letters and ecclesiastical statutes." De orthographia is a work on orthography, designed to help a medieval reader of Latin with unfamiliar abbreviations and words from classical Latin works. Although it could serve as a textbook, it appears to have been mainly intended as a reference work. The date of composition for both of these works is unknown.
De schematibus et tropis sacrae scripturae discusses the Bible's use of rhetoric. Bede was familiar with pagan authors such as Virgil, but it was not considered appropriate to teach biblical grammar from such texts, and Bede argues for the superiority of Christian texts in understanding Christian literature. Similarly, his text on poetic metre uses only Christian poetry for examples.

Latin poetry
A number of poems have been attributed to Bede. His poetic output has been systematically surveyed and edited by Michael Lapidge, who concluded that the following works belong to Bede: the Versus de die iudicii ("verses on the day of Judgement", found complete in 33 manuscripts and fragmentarily in 10); the metrical Vita Sancti Cudbercti ("Life of St Cuthbert"); and two collections of verse mentioned in the Historia ecclesiastica V.24.2. Bede names the first of these collections as "librum epigrammatum heroico metro siue elegiaco" ("a book of epigrams in the heroic or elegiac metre"), and much of its content has been reconstructed by Lapidge from scattered attestations under the title Liber epigrammatum. The second is named as "liber hymnorum diuerso metro siue rythmo" ("a book of hymns, diverse in metre or rhythm"); this has been reconstructed by Lapidge as containing ten liturgical hymns, one paraliturgical hymn (for the Feast of St Æthelthryth), and four other hymn-like compositions.

Vernacular poetry
According to his disciple Cuthbert, Bede was doctus in nostris carminibus ("learned in our songs"). Cuthbert's letter on Bede's death, the Epistola Cuthberti de obitu Bedae, moreover, commonly is understood to indicate that Bede composed a five-line vernacular poem known to modern scholars as Bede's Death Song

And he used to repeat that sentence from St Paul "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God," and many other verses of Scripture, urging us thereby to awake from the slumber of the soul by thinking in good time of our last hour. And in our own language—for he was familiar with English poetry—speaking of the soul's dread departure from the body:

As Opland notes, however, it is not entirely clear that Cuthbert is attributing this text to Bede: most manuscripts of the latter do not use a finite verb to describe Bede's presentation of the song, and the theme was relatively common in Old English and Anglo-Latin literature. The fact that Cuthbert's description places the performance of the Old English poem in the context of a series of quoted passages from Sacred Scripture might be taken as evidence simply that Bede also cited analogous vernacular texts.
On the other hand, the inclusion of the Old English text of the poem in Cuthbert's Latin letter, the observation that Bede "was learned in our song," and the fact that Bede composed a Latin poem on the same subject all point to the possibility of his having written it. By citing the poem directly, Cuthbert seems to imply that its particular wording was somehow important, either since it was a vernacular poem endorsed by a scholar who evidently frowned upon secular entertainment or because it is a direct quotation of Bede's last original composition.

Veneration
There is no evidence for cult being paid to Bede in England in the 8th century. One reason for this may be that he died on the feast day of Augustine of Canterbury. Later, when he was venerated in England, he was either commemorated after Augustine on 26 May, or his feast was moved to 27 May. However, he was venerated outside England, mainly through the efforts of Boniface and Alcuin, both of whom promoted the cult on the continent. Boniface wrote repeatedly back to England during his missionary efforts, requesting copies of Bede's theological works.
Alcuin, who was taught at the school set up in York by Bede's pupil Ecgbert, praised Bede as an example for monks to follow and was instrumental in disseminating Bede's works to all of Alcuin's friends. Bede's cult became prominent in England during the 10th-century revival of monasticism and by the 14th century had spread to many of the cathedrals of England. Wulfstan, Bishop of Worcester was a particular devotee of Bede's, dedicating a church to him in 1062, which was Wulfstan's first undertaking after his consecration as bishop.
His body was 'translated' (the ecclesiastical term for relocation of relics) from Jarrow to Durham Cathedral around 1020, where it was placed in the same tomb with St Cuthbert. Later Bede's remains were moved to a shrine in the Galilee Chapel at Durham Cathedral in 1370. The shrine was destroyed during the English Reformation, but the bones were reburied in the chapel. In 1831 the bones were dug up and then reburied in a new tomb, which is still there. Other relics were claimed by York, Glastonbury and Fulda.
His scholarship and importance to Catholicism were recognised in 1899 when the Vatican declared him a Doctor of the Church. He was the only Englishman named a Doctor of the Church until 2025, when John Henry Newman was named a Doctor of the Church. He is also the only Englishman in Dante's Paradise (Paradiso X.130), mentioned among theologians and doctors of the church in the same canto as Isidore of Seville and the Scot Richard of St Victor.
His feast day was included in the General Roman Calendar in 1899, for celebration on 27 May rather than on his date of death, 26 May, which was then the feast day of St Augustine of Canterbury. He is venerated in the Catholic Church, in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church (United States) on 25 May, and in the Eastern Orthodox Church, with a feast day on 27 May (Βεδέα του Ομολογητού).
Bede became known as Venerable Bede (Latin: Beda Venerabilis) by the 9th century because of his holiness, but this was not linked to consideration for sainthood by the Catholic Church. According to a legend, the epithet was miraculously supplied by angels, thus completing his unfinished epitaph. It is first utilised in connection with Bede in the 9th century, where Bede was grouped with others who were called "venerable" at two ecclesiastical councils held at Aachen in 816 and 836. Paul the Deacon then referred to him as venerable consistently. By the 11th and 12th century, it had become commonplace.

Modern legacy
Bede's reputation as a historian, based mostly on the Historia Ecclesiastica, remains strong. Thomas Carlyle called him "the greatest historical writer since Herodotus". Walter Goffart says of Bede that he "holds a privileged and unrivalled place among first historians of Christian Europe". He is patron of Beda College in Rome which prepares older men for the Catholic priesthood. His life and work have been celebrated with the annual Jarrow Lecture, held at St Paul's Church, Jarrow, since 1958.
Jarrow Hall (formerly Bede's World), in Jarrow, is a museum that documents the history of Bede and other parts of English heritage, on the site where he lived.
Bede Metro station, part of the Tyne and Wear Metro light rail network, is named after him.

See also
List of manuscripts of Bede's Historia Ecclesiastica
List of works by Bede
Medieval ecclesiastic historiography
 Catholic Church portal

Notes
References
Sources
Primary sources
Secondary sources
Further reading
Story, Joanna; Bailey, Richard (2015). "The Skull of Bede". The Antiquaries Journal. 95: 325–350. doi:10.1017/s0003581515000244. hdl:2381/32092. S2CID 163360680.

External links

Dickinson College Commentaries: Historia Ecclēsiastica
Works by Bede at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Bede at the Internet Archive
Works by Bede at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Bede's World: the museum of early medieval Northumbria at Jarrow
The Venerable Bede from In Our Time (BBC Radio 4)
Ecclesiastical History of the English People, Books 1–5, L.C. Jane's 1903 Temple Classics translation. From the Internet Medieval Sourcebook.
Ecclesiastical History, Volume I — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press
Ecclesiastical History, Volume II — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press
Bede's Ecclesiastical History and the Continuation of Bede (pdf), at CCEL, edited & translated by A.M. Sellar.
Saint Bede, complete works, in Latin, with historical works also in English at The Online Library of Liberty
Dionysius Exiguus' Paschal table

================================================================================

# Biota (ecology)

A biome () is a distinct geographical region with specific climate, vegetation, and animal life. It consists of a biological community that has formed in response to its physical environment and regional climate. In 1935, Tansley added the climatic and soil aspects to the idea, calling it ecosystem. The International Biological Program (1964–74) projects popularized the concept of biome.
However, in some contexts, the term biome is used in a different manner. In German literature, particularly in the Walter terminology, the term is used similarly as biotope (a concrete geographical unit), while the biome definition used in this article is used as an international, non-regional, terminology—irrespectively of the continent in which an area is present, it takes the same biome name—and corresponds to his "zonobiome", "orobiome" and "pedobiome" (biomes determined by climate zone, altitude or soil).
In the Brazilian literature, the term biome is sometimes used as a synonym of biogeographic province, an area based on species composition (the term floristic province being used when plant species are considered), or also as synonym of the "morphoclimatic and phytogeographical domain" of Ab'Sáber, a geographic space with subcontinental dimensions, with the predominance of similar geomorphologic and climatic characteristics, and of a certain vegetation form. Both include many biomes in fact.

Classifications
To divide the world into a few ecological zones is difficult, notably because of the small-scale variations that exist everywhere on earth and because of the gradual changeover from one biome to the other. Their boundaries must therefore be drawn arbitrarily and their characterization made according to the average conditions that predominate in them.
A 1978 study on North American grasslands found a positive logistic correlation between evapotranspiration in mm/yr and above-ground net primary production in g/m2/yr. The general results from the study were that precipitation and water use led to above-ground primary production, while solar irradiation and temperature lead to below-ground primary production (roots), and temperature and water lead to cool and warm season growth habit. These findings help explain the categories used in Holdridge's bioclassification scheme (see below), which were then later simplified by Whittaker. The number of classification schemes and the variety of determinants used in those schemes, however, should be taken as strong indicators that biomes do not fit perfectly into the classification schemes created.

Holdridge (1947, 1964) life zones
In 1947, the American botanist and climatologist Leslie Holdridge classified climates based on the biological effects of temperature and rainfall on vegetation under the assumption that these two abiotic factors are the largest determinants of the types of vegetation found in a habitat. Holdridge uses the four axes to define 30 so-called "humidity provinces", which are clearly visible in his diagram. While this scheme largely ignores soil and sun exposure, Holdridge acknowledged that these were important.

Allee (1949) biome-types
The principal biome-types by Allee (1949):

Tundra
Taiga
Deciduous forest
Grasslands
Desert
High plateaus
Tropical forest
Minor terrestrial biomes

Kendeigh (1961) biomes
The principal biomes of the world by Kendeigh (1961):

Terrestrial
Temperate deciduous forest
Coniferous forest
Woodland
Chaparral
Tundra
Grassland
Desert
Tropical savanna
Tropical forest
Marine
Oceanic plankton and nekton
Balanoid-gastropod-thallophyte
Pelecypod-annelid
Coral reef

Whittaker (1962, 1970, 1975) biome-types
Whittaker classified biomes using two abiotic factors: precipitation and temperature. His scheme can be seen as a simplification of Holdridge's; more readily accessible, but missing Holdridge's greater specificity.
Whittaker based his approach on theoretical assertions and empirical sampling. He had previously compiled a review of biome classifications.

Key definitions for understanding Whittaker's scheme
Physiognomy: sometimes referring to the plants' appearance; or the biome's apparent characteristics, outward features, or appearance of ecological communities or species – including plants.
Biome: a grouping of terrestrial ecosystems on a given continent that is similar in vegetation structure, physiognomy, features of the environment and characteristics of their animal communities.
Formation: a major kind of community of plants on a given continent.
Biome-type: grouping of convergent biomes or formations of different continents, defined by physiognomy.
Formation-type: a grouping of convergent formations.
Whittaker's distinction between biome and formation can be simplified: formation is used when applied to plant communities only, while biome is used when concerned with both plants and animals. Whittaker's convention of biome-type or formation-type is a broader method to categorize similar communities.

Whittaker's parameters for classifying biome-types
Whittaker used what he called "gradient analysis" of ecocline patterns to relate communities to climate on a worldwide scale. Whittaker considered four main ecoclines in the terrestrial realm.

Intertidal levels: The wetness gradient of areas that are exposed to alternating water and dryness with intensities that vary by location from high to low tide
Climatic moisture gradient
Temperature gradient by altitude
Temperature gradient by latitude
Along these gradients, Whittaker noted several trends that allowed him to qualitatively establish biome-types:

The gradient runs from favorable to the extreme, with corresponding changes in productivity.
Changes in physiognomic complexity vary with how favorable of an environment exists (decreasing community structure and reduction of stratal differentiation as the environment becomes less favorable).
Trends in the diversity of structure follow trends in species diversity; alpha and beta species diversities decrease from favorable to extreme environments.
Each growth-form (i.e. grasses, shrubs, etc.) has its characteristic place of maximum importance along the ecoclines.
The same growth forms may be dominant in similar environments in widely different parts of the world.
Whittaker summed the effects of gradients (3) and (4) to get an overall temperature gradient and combined this with a gradient (2), the moisture gradient, to express the above conclusions in what is known as the Whittaker classification scheme. The scheme graphs average annual precipitation (x-axis) versus average annual temperature (y-axis) to classify biome-types.

Biome-types
Goodall (1974–) ecosystem types
The multi-authored series Ecosystems of the World, edited by David W. Goodall, provides a comprehensive coverage of the major "ecosystem types or biomes" on Earth:

Walter (1976, 2002) zonobiomes
The eponymously named Heinrich Walter classification scheme considers the seasonality of temperature and precipitation. The system, also assessing precipitation and temperature, finds nine major biome types, with the important climate traits and vegetation types. The boundaries of each biome correlate to the conditions of moisture and cold stress that are strong determinants of plant form, and therefore the vegetation that defines the region. Extreme conditions, such as flooding in a swamp, can create different kinds of communities within the same biome.

Schultz (1988) eco-zones
Schultz (1988, 2005) defined nine ecozones (his concept of ecozone is more similar to the concept of biome than to the concept of ecozone of BBC):

Bailey (1989) ecoregions
Robert G. Bailey nearly developed a biogeographical classification system of ecoregions for the United States in a map published in 1976. He subsequently expanded the system to include the rest of North America in 1981, and the world in 1989. The Bailey system, based on climate, is divided into four domains (polar, humid temperate, dry, and humid tropical), with further divisions based on other climate characteristics (subarctic, warm temperate, hot temperate, and subtropical; marine and continental; lowland and mountain).

100 Polar Domain
120 Tundra Division (Köppen: Ft)
M120 Tundra Division – Mountain Provinces
130 Subarctic Division (Köppen: E)
M130 Subarctic Division – Mountain Provinces
200 Humid Temperate Domain
210 Warm Continental Division (Köppen: portion of Dcb)
M210 Warm Continental Division – Mountain Provinces
220 Hot Continental Division (Köppen: portion of Dca)
M220 Hot Continental Division – Mountain Provinces
230 Subtropical Division (Köppen: portion of Cf)
M230 Subtropical Division – Mountain Provinces
240 Marine Division (Köppen: Do)
M240 Marine Division – Mountain Provinces
250 Prairie Division (Köppen: arid portions of Cf, Dca, Dcb)
260 Mediterranean Division (Köppen: Cs)
M260 Mediterranean Division – Mountain Provinces
300 Dry Domain
310 Tropical/Subtropical Steppe Division
M310 Tropical/Subtropical Steppe Division – Mountain Provinces
320 Tropical/Subtropical Desert Division
330 Temperate Steppe Division
340 Temperate Desert Division
400 Humid Tropical Domain
410 Savanna Division
420 Rainforest Division

Olson & Dinerstein (1998) biomes for WWF / Global 200
A team of biologists convened by the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) developed a scheme that divided the world's land area into biogeographic realms (called "ecozones" in a BBC scheme), and these into ecoregions (Olson & Dinerstein, 1998, etc.). Each ecoregion is characterized by a main biome (also called major habitat type).
This classification is used to define the Global 200 list of ecoregions identified by the WWF as priorities for conservation.
For the terrestrial ecoregions, there is a specific EcoID, format XXnnNN (XX is the biogeographic realm, nn is the biome number, NN is the individual number).

Biogeographic realms (terrestrial and freshwater)
The applicability of the realms scheme above – based on Udvardy (1975)—to most freshwater taxa is unresolved.

Biogeographic realms (marine)
Biomes (terrestrial)
Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests (tropical and subtropical, humid)
Tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests (tropical and subtropical, semihumid)
Tropical and subtropical coniferous forests (tropical and subtropical, semihumid)
Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests (temperate, humid)
Temperate coniferous forests (temperate, humid to semihumid)
Boreal forests/taiga (subarctic, humid)
Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands (tropical and subtropical, semiarid)
Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands (temperate, semiarid)
Flooded grasslands and savannas (temperate to tropical, fresh or brackish water inundated)
Montane grasslands and shrublands (alpine or montane climate)
Tundra (Arctic)
Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub or sclerophyll forests (temperate warm, semihumid to semiarid with winter rainfall)
Deserts and xeric shrublands (temperate to tropical, arid)
Mangrove (subtropical and tropical, salt water inundated)

Biomes (freshwater)
According to the WWF, the following are classified as freshwater biomes:

Biomes (marine)
Biomes of the coastal and continental shelf areas (neritic zone):

Polar
Temperate shelves and sea
Temperate upwelling
Tropical upwelling
Tropical coral

Summary of the scheme
Biosphere
Biogeographic realms (terrestrial) (8)
Ecoregions (867), each characterized by a biome, a major habitat type (14)
Ecosystems (biotopes)
Biosphere
Biogeographic realms (freshwater) (8)
Ecoregions (426), each characterized by a biome, a major habitat type (12)
Ecosystems (biotopes)
Biosphere
Biogeographic realms (marine) (12)
(Marine provinces) (62)
Ecoregions (232), each characterized by a biome, a major habitat type (5)
Ecosystems (biotopes)
Example:

Biosphere
Biogeographic realm: Palearctic
Ecoregion: Dinaric Mountains mixed forests (PA0418); biome type: temperate broadleaf and mixed forests
Ecosystem: Orjen, vegetation belt between 1,100 and 1,450 m, Oromediterranean zone, nemoral zone (temperate zone)
Biotope: Oreoherzogio-Abietetum illyricae Fuk. (Plant list)
Plant: Silver fir (Abies alba)

Other biomes
Marine biomes
Pruvot (1896) zones or "systems":

Littoral zone
Pelagic zone
Abyssal zone
Longhurst (1998) biomes:

Coastal
Polar
Trade wind
Westerly
Other marine habitat types (not covered yet by the Global 200/WWF scheme):

Anthropogenic biomes
Humans have altered global patterns of biodiversity and ecosystem processes. As a result, vegetation forms predicted by conventional biome systems can no longer be observed across much of Earth's land surface as they have been replaced by crops and rangelands or cities. Anthropogenic biomes provide an alternative view of the terrestrial biosphere based on global patterns of sustained direct human interaction with ecosystems, including agriculture, human settlements, urbanization, forestry and other uses of land. Anthropogenic biomes offer a way to recognize the irreversible coupling of human and ecological systems at global scales and manage Earth's biosphere and anthropogenic biomes.

Major anthropogenic biomes:

Dense settlements
Croplands
Rangelands
Forested
Indoor

Microbial biomes
Endolithic biomes
The endolithic biome, consisting entirely of microscopic life in rock pores and cracks, kilometers beneath the surface, has only recently been discovered, and does not fit well into most classification schemes.

Effects of climate change
Anthropogenic climate change has the potential to greatly alter the distribution of Earth's biomes. Meaning, biomes around the world could change so much that they would be at risk of becoming new biomes entirely. More specifically, between 54% and 22% of global land area will experience climates that correspond to other biomes. 3.6% of land area will experience climates that are completely new or unusual. An example of a biome shift is woody plant encroachment, which can change grass savanna into shrub savanna.

Average temperatures have risen more than twice the usual amount in both arctic and mountainous biomes, which leads to the conclusion that arctic and mountainous biomes are currently the most vulnerable to climate change. South American terrestrial biomes have been predicted to go through the same temperature trends as arctic and mountainous biomes. With its annual average temperature continuing to increase, the moisture currently located in forest biomes will dry up.

See also
References
Further reading
Ritter, Michael E. (2005). The Physical Environment: an Introduction to Physical Geography. University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point.

External links

University of California Museum of Paleontology Berkeley's The World's Biomes
Gale/Cengage Biome Overview (archived 11 July 2011)
"Biomes". Encyclopedia of Earth. Archived from the original on 2013-07-02. Retrieved 2016-02-25.
Global Currents and Terrestrial Biomes Map Archived 2010-01-04 at the Wayback Machine
WorldBiomes.com (archived 22 February 2011)
Panda.org's Major Habitat Types (archived 6 July 2017)
NASA's Earth Observatory Mission: Biomes Archived 2020-08-05 at the Wayback Machine
World Map of Desert Biomes Archived 2022-10-14 at the Wayback Machine

================================================================================

# Geological oceanography

Marine geology or geological oceanography is the study of the history and structure of the ocean floor. It involves geophysical, geochemical, sedimentological and paleontological investigations of the ocean floor and coastal zone. Marine geology has strong ties to geophysics and to physical oceanography.
Marine geological studies were of extreme importance in providing the critical evidence for sea floor spreading and plate tectonics in the years following World War II. The deep ocean floor is the last essentially unexplored frontier and detailed mapping in support of economic (petroleum and metal mining), natural disaster mitigation, and academic objectives.

History
The study of marine geology dates back to the late 1800s during the 4-year HMS Challenger expedition. HMS Challenger hosted nearly 250 people, including sailors, engineers, carpenters, marines, officers, and a 6-person team of scientists, led by Charles Wyville Thomson. The scientists' goal was to prove that there was life in the deepest parts of the ocean. Using a sounding rope, dropped over the edge of the ship, the team was able to capture ample amounts of data. Part of their discovery was that the deepest part of the ocean was not in the middle. These were some of the first records of the mid-ocean ridge system.
Prior to World War II, marine geology grew as a scientific discipline. During the early 20th century, organizations such as the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) were created to support efforts in the field. With Scripps being located on the west coast of North America and WHOI on the east coast, the study of marine geology became much more accessible.
In the 1950s, marine geology had one of the most significant discoveries, the mid-ocean ridge system. After ships were equipped with sonar sensors, they travelled back and forth across the Atlantic Ocean collecting observations of the sea floor. In 1953, the cartographer Marie Tharp generated the first three-dimensional relief map of the ocean floor which proved there was an underwater mountain range in the middle of the Atlantic, along with the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The survey data was large step towards many more discoveries about the geology of the sea.

In 1960, the American geophysicist Harry H. Hess hypothesized that the seafloor was spreading from the mid-ocean ridge system. With support from the maps of the sea floor, and the recently developed theory of plate tectonics and continental drift, Hess was able to prove that the Earth's mantle continuously released molten rock from the mid-ocean ridge and that the molten rock then solidified, causing the boundary between the two tectonic plates to diverge. A geomagnetic survey was conducted that supported this theory. The survey was composed of scientists using magnetometers to measure the magnetism of the basalt rock protruding from the mid-ocean ridge. They discovered that on either side of the ridge, symmetrical "strips" were found as the polarity of the planet would change over time. This proved that seafloor spreading existed. In later years, newer technology was able to date the rocks and identified that rocks closest to the ridge were younger than the rocks near the coasts of the Western and Eastern Hemispheres land.
At present, marine geology focuses on geological hazards, environmental conditions, habitats, natural resources, and energy and mining projects.

Methods
There are multiple methods for collecting data from the sea floor without physically dispatching humans or machines to the bottom of the ocean.

Side-scan sonar
A common method of collecting imagery of the sea floor is side-scan sonar. Developed in the late 1960s, the purpose of the survey method is to use active sonar systems on the sea floor to detect and develop images of objects. The physical sensors of the sonar device are known as a transducer array and they are mounted onto the hull of a vessel which sends acoustic pulses that reflect off the seafloor and received by the sensors. The imaging can help determine the seafloors composition as harder objects generate a stronger reflectance and appear dark on the returned image. Softer materials such as sand and mud cannot reflect the arrays pulses as well so they appear lighter on the image. This information can be analyzed by specialist to determine outcrops of rock beneath the surface of the water.
This method is less expensive than releasing a vehicle to take photographs of the sea floor, and requires less time. The side-scan sonar is useful for scientists as it is a quick and efficient way of collecting imagery of the sea floor, but it cannot measure other factors, such as depth. Therefore, other depth measuring sonar devices are typically accompanied with the side-scan sonar to generate a more detailed survey.

Multibeam bathymetry
Similarly to side-scan sonar, multibeam bathymetry uses a transducer array to send and receive sound waves in order to detect objects located on the sea floor. Unlike side-scan sonar, scientists are able to determine multiple types of measurements from the recordings and make hypothesis' on the data collected. By understanding the speed at which sound will travel in the water, scientists can calculate the two way travel time from the ship's sensor to the seafloor and back to the ship. These calculations will determine to depth of the sea floor in that area.

Backscatter is another measurement used to determine the intensity of the sound that is returned to the sensor. This information can provide insight on the geological makeup and objects of the sea floor as well as objects located within the water column. Objects in the water column can include structures from shipwrecks, dense biology, and bubble plumes. The importance of objects in the water column to marine geology is identifying specific features as bubble plumes can indicate the presence of hydrothermal vents and cold seeps.
There are limitations to this technique. The distance between the sea floor and the sensor is related to the resolution of the map being created. The closer the sensor is the sea floor, the higher the resolution will be and the farther away the sensor is to the sea floor, the lower the resolution will be. Therefore, it is common for remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) and autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) to be equipped with the multibeam sensor or for the sensor to be towed by the ship itself. This ensures that the resolution of the collected data will be high enough for proper analysis.

Sub-bottom profiler
A sub-bottom profiler is another sonar system used in geophysical surveys of the sea floor to not only map depth, but also to map beneath the sea floor. Mounted to the hull of a ship, the system releases low-frequency pulses which penetrate the surface of the sea floor and are reflected by sediments in the sub-surface. Some sensors can reach over 1000 meters below the surface of the sea floor, giving hydrographers a detailed view of the marine geological environment.
Many sub-bottom profilers can emit multiple frequencies of sound to record data on a multitude of sediments and objects on and below the sea floor. The returned data is collected by computers and with aid from hydrographers, can create cross-sections of the terrain below the sea floor. The resolution of the data also allows scientists to identify geological features such as volcanic ridges, underwater landslides, ancient river beds, and other features.
The benefit of the sub-bottom profiler is its capability to record information on the surface and below the seafloor. When accompanied with geophysical data from multibeam sonar and physical data from rock and core samples, the sub-bottom profiles delivers insights on the location and morphology of submarine landslide, identifies how oceanic gasses travel through the subsurface, discover artifacts from cultural heritages, understand sediment deposition, and more.

Marine magnetometry
Magnetometry is the process of measuring changes in the Earth's magnetic field. The outer layer of the Earth's core is liquid and mostly made up of magnetic iron and nickel. When the Earth turns on its axis, the metals release electrical currents which generate magnetic fields. These fields can then be measured to reveal geological subseafloor structures. This method is especially useful in marine exploration and geology as it can not only characterize geological features on the seafloor but can survey aircraft and ship wrecks deep under the sea.
A magnetometer is the main piece of equipment deployed, which is typically towed behind a vessel or mounted to a AUV. It is able to measure the changes in fields of magnetism and corresponding geolocation to create maps. The magnetometer evaluates the magnetic presence generally every second, or one hertz, but can be calibrated to measure at different speeds depending on the study. The readings will be consistent until the device detects ferrous material. This could range from a ship's hull to ferrous basalt at the seafloor. The sudden change in magnetism can be analyzed on the magnetometer's display.
The benefit to a magnetometer compared to sonar devices is its ability to detect artifacts and geological features on top and underneath the seafloor. Because the magnetometer is a passive sensor, and does not emit waves, its exploration depth is unlimited. Although, in most studies, the resolution and certainty of the data collected is dependent on the distance from the device. The closer the device is to a ferrous object, the better the data collected.

Plate tectonics
Plate tectonics is a scientific theory developed in the 1960s that explains major land form events, such as mountain building, volcanoes, earthquakes, and mid-ocean ridge systems. The idea is that Earth's most outer layer, known as the lithosphere, that is made up of the crust and mantle is divided into extensive plates of rock. These plates sit on top of partially molten layer of rock known as the asthenosphere and move relative to each other due to convection between the asthenosphere and lithosphere. The speed at which the plates move ranges between 2 and 15 centimeters per year. Why this theory is so significant is the interaction between the tectonic plates explains many geological formations. In regards to marine geology, the movement of the plates explains seafloor spreading and mid-ocean ridge systems, subduction zones and trenches, volcanism and hydrothermal vents, and more.
There are three major types of tectonic plate boundaries; divergent, convergent, and transform boundaries. Divergent plate boundaries are when two tectonic plates move away from each other, convergent plate boundaries are when two plates move towards each other, and transform plate boundaries are when two plates slide sideways past each other. Each boundary type is associated with different geological marine features. Divergent plates are the cause for mid-ocean ridge systems while convergent plates are responsible for subduction zones and the creation of deep ocean trenches. Transform boundaries cause earthquakes, displacement of rock, and crustal deformation.

Mid-ocean ridge system
Divergent plates are directly responsible for the largest mountain range on Earth, known as the mid-ocean ridge system. At nearly 60,000 km long, the mid-ocean ridge is an extensive chain of underwater volcanic mountains that spans the globe. Centralized in the oceans, this unique geological formation houses a collection of ridges, rifts, fault zones, and other geological features.
The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is a consequence of the diverging North American and Eurasian, and the African and South American Plates. It began forming over 200 million years ago when the American, African and European continents were still connected, forming the Pangea. After continental drift, the ridge system became more defined and in the last 75 years, it has been intensely studied. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge was also served as the birthplace for the discovery of seafloor spreading. As volcanic activity produces new oceanic crust along the ridge, the two plates diverge from each other pulling up the new ocean floor from below the crust. Along the ocean-continent border of the tectonic plates, the oceanic plates subduct underneath the continental plates, creating some of the deepest marine trenches in the world

Subduction zones
Subduction zones are caused when two tectonic plates converge on each other and one plate is pushed beneath the other. In a marine setting, this typically occurs when the oceanic crust subducts below the continental crust, resulting in volcanic activity and the development of deep ocean trenches. Marine geology focuses on mapping and understanding how these processes function. Renowned geological features created through subduction zones include the Mariana Trench and the Ring of Fire.

Mariana Trench
The Mariana Trench is the deepest known submarine trench, and the deepest location in the Earth's crust itself. It is a subduction zone where the Pacific Plate is being subducted under the Mariana Plate. At the deepest point, the trench is nearly 11,000 m deep (almost 36,000 feet). This is further below sea level than Mount Everest is above sea level, by over 2 kilometers.

Ring of Fire
The Ring of Fire is situated around the Pacific Ocean, created from several converging plate boundaries. Its intense volcanism and seismic activity poses a major threat for disastrous earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions. Any early warning systems and mitigation techniques for these disastrous events will require marine geology of coastal and island arc environments to predict events.

Economic benefits
Resource exploration
Marine geology has several methods of detecting geological features below the sea. One of the economic benefits of geological surveying of the seafloor is determining valuable resources that can be extracted. The two major resources mined at sea include oil and minerals. Over the last 30 years, deep-sea mining has generated between $9 -$11 billion USD in the United States of America. Although this sector seems profitable, it is a high risk, high reward industry with many harmful environmental impacts.
Some of the major minerals extracted from the sea include nickel, copper, cobalt, manganese, zinc, gold, and other metals. These minerals are commonly formed around volcanic activity, more specifically hydrothermal vents and polymetallic nodules. These vents emit large volumes of super-heated, metal infused fluids that rise and rapidly cool when mixed with the cold seawater. The chemical reaction causes sulfur and minerals to precipitate and from chimneys, towers, and mineral-rich deposits on the sea floor. Polymetallic nodules, also known as manganese nodules, are rounded ores formed over millions of years from precipitating metals from seawater and sediment pore water. They are typically found unattached, spread across the abyssal seafloor and contain metals crucial for building batteries and touch screens, including cobalt, nickel, copper, and manganese.

A popular area for deep-sea mining, located in the Pacific Ocean, in the Clarion–Clipperton zone (CCZ). The CCZ is approximately 4,500,000 square kilometers constructed of various submarine fracture zones. It has been divided into 16 mining claims and 9 sections dedicated to conservation. According to the International Seabed Authority (ISA), there is an estimated 21 billion tons (Bt) of nodules; 5.95 Bt of manganese, 0.27 Bt of nickel, 0.23 Bt of copper, and 0.05 Bt of cobalt. It is a highly sought-after area for mining because of the yield of minerals it possesses.

Offshore energy development
Marine geology also has many applications on the subject of offshore energy development. Offshore energy is the generation of electricity using ocean-based resources. This includes using wind, thermal, wave, and tidal movement to convert to energy. Understanding the seafloor and geological features can help develop the infrastructure to support these renewable energy sources. Underwater geological features can dictate ocean properties, such as currents and temperatures, which are crucial for location placement of the necessary infrastructure to produce energy.
The stability of the seafloor is important for the creation of offshore wind turbines. Most turbines are secured to the seafloor using monopiles, if the water depth is greater than 15 meters. There must be inserted in areas that are not at risk to sediment deposition, erosion, or tectonic activity. Surveying the geological area before development is needed to insure proper support of the turbines and forces applied to them. Another example why marine geology is needed for future energy projects is to understand wave and current patterns. Analyzing the effects that the seafloor has on water movement can help support planning and location selection of generators offshore and optimize energy farming.

Environmental impacts and mitigation
Habitat mapping and conservation
Marine geology has a key role in habitat mapping and conservation. With global events causing potentially irreversible damage to the sea habitats, such as deep-sea mining and bottom trawling, marine geology can help us study and mitigate the effects of these activity.
The CCZ has been surveyed and mapped to designate specific areas for mining and for conservation. The International Seabed Authority has set aside approximately 160,000 square kilometers of seabed within the CCZ as the area is rich with biodiversity and habitats. The zone houses over 5,000 species, including sea cucumbers, corals, crabs, shrimps, glass sponges, and members of the spider family and, has been an area where new species of sea worms have been discovered. Furthermore, 90% of the species have yet to be identified. Proper marine survey techniques have protected thousands of habitats and species by dedicating it to conservation.
Bottom trawling also poses a detrimental effects to the sea and using marine geology techniques can be helpful at mitigating them. Bottom trawling, generally a commercial fishing technique, involves dragging a large net that herds and captures a target species, such as fish or crabs. During this process, the net damages the seafloor by scraping and removing animals and vegetation living on the seabed, including coral reefs, sharks, and sea turtles. It can tear up root systems and animal burrows, which can directly affect the sediment distribution. This can lead to the change in chemistry and nutriment levels in the sea water. Marine geology can determine areas which have been damaged to employ habitat restoration techniques. It can also help determine areas that have not been affecting by bottom trawling and employ conservation protection.

Sediment transportation and coastal erosion
Sediment transportation and coastal erosion is a complex subject that is necessary to understand to protect infrastructure and the environment. Coastal erosion is the process of sediment and materials breaking down and transported due to the effects of the sea. This can lead to destruction animal habitats, fishing industries, and infrastructure. In the United States, damages to properties and infrastructure has caused approximately $500 million per year, and an additional $150 million a year is dedicated to mitigation from the U.S. federal government. Marine geology supports the study of sediment types, current patterns, and ocean topography to predict erosional trends which can protect these environments.

Natural hazard assessment
Earthquakes are one of the most common natural disasters. Furthermore, they can cause other disasters, such as tsunamis and landslides, such as the underwater earthquake in the Indian Ocean occurred at a magnitude of 9.1 which then triggered a tsunami that caused waves to reach a height of at least 30 ft and killed approximately 230,000 people in 13 different countries. Marine geology and understanding plate boundaries supports the development of early warning systems and other mitigation techniques to protect the people and environments who may be susceptible to natural disasters. Many earthquake early warning systems (EEWS) are in place and more are being developed.

Future research
Seafloor mapping and bathymetry
Many section of the oceans are permanently dark, low temperatures, and are under extreme pressure, making them difficult to observe. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), only 23% of the seafloor has been mapped in detail and one of the leading projects in exploration is developing high-resolution maps of the seafloor. The Okeanos Explorer, a vessel owned by NOAA, has already mapped over 2 million km2 of the seafloor using multibeam sonar since 2008, but this technique has proved to be too time-consuming.
The importance of mapping the seafloor has been recognized by governments and scientists alike. Because of this, an international collaboration effort to create a high-definition map of the entire seafloor was developed, called the Nippon Foundation-GEBCO Seabed 2030 Project. This committee has a set goal to have the project finished by 2030. To reach their goal, they are equipping old, new, and autonomous vehicles with sonar, sensors, and other GIS based technology to reach their goal.

See also
Geology portal
Oceans portal
Bathymetric chart
Hawaiian-Emperor seamount chain
Hydrogeology
Pelagic sediments
Seafloor mapping

References
Sources
Erickson, Jon, 1996, Marine Geology: Undersea Landforms and Life Forms, Facts on File ISBN 0-8160-3354-4
"What is the Ring of Fire? : Ocean Exploration Facts: NOAA Office of Ocean Exploration and Research". oceanexplorer.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2023-02-10.
Atwood, Trisha B.; Witt, Andrew; Mayorga, Juan; Hammill, Edd; Sala, Enric (2020). "Global Patterns in Marine Sediment Carbon Stocks". Frontiers in Marine Science. 7. doi:10.3389/fmars.2020.00165/full. ISSN 2296-7745.
Merino, Nancy; Aronson, Heidi S.; Bojanova, Diana P.; Feyhl-Buska, Jayme; Wong, Michael L.; Zhang, Shu; Giovannelli, Donato (2019). "Living at the Extremes: Extremophiles and the Limits of Life in a Planetary Context". Frontiers in Microbiology. 10. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2019.00780/full. ISSN 1664-302X.

External links
Soundwaves Coastal Science & Research News from Across the USGS
Marine Geology and Geophysics – NOAA
Pacific Seafloor Mapping Project – USGS
Marine Geology and Geophysics at MIT
Ocean Drilling Program

================================================================================

# Ocean current

An ocean current is a continuous, directed movement of seawater generated by a number of forces acting upon the water, including wind, the Coriolis effect, breaking waves, cabbeling, and temperature and salinity differences. Depth contours, shoreline configurations, and interactions with other currents influence a current's direction and strength. Ocean currents move both horizontally, on scales that can span entire oceans, as well as vertically, with vertical currents (upwelling and downwelling) playing an important role in the movement of nutrients and gases, such as carbon dioxide, between the surface and the deep ocean. 
Ocean currents are classified by temperature as either warm currents or cold currents. They are also classified by their velocity, dimension, and direction as either drifts, currents, or streams. Drifts, such as the North Atlantic Drift Current, involve the forward movement of surface ocean water under the influence of the prevailing wind. Currents, such as the Labrador Current, 
involve the movement of oceanic water in a more definite direction at a greater velocity than drifts. Streams, such as the Gulf Stream, involve movement of larger masses of ocean water with greater velocity than drifts or currents.
Ocean currents are patterns of water movement that influence climate zones and weather patterns around the world. They are primarily driven by winds and by seawater density, although many other factors influence them, including the shape and configuration of the oceanic basin they flow through. The two basic types of currents – surface and deep-water currents – help define the character and flow of ocean waters across the planet.
Ocean currents flow for great distances, and together they create the global conveyor belt, which plays a dominant role in determining the climate of many of Earth's regions. More specifically, ocean currents influence the temperature of the regions through which they travel. For example, warm currents traveling along more temperate coasts increase the temperature of the area by warming the sea breezes that blow over them. Perhaps the most striking example is the Gulf Stream, which, together with its extension the North Atlantic Drift, makes northwest Europe much more temperate for its high latitude than other areas at the same latitude. Another example is Lima, Peru, whose cooler subtropical climate contrasts with that of its surrounding tropical latitudes because of the Humboldt Current.
The largest ocean current is the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), a wind-driven current which flows clockwise uninterrupted around Antarctica. The ACC connects all the oceanic basins together, and also provides a link between the atmosphere and the deep ocean due to the way water upwells and downwells on either side of it.

Causes
Ocean currents are driven by the wind, by the gravitational pull of the moon in the form of tides, and by the effects of variations in water density. Ocean dynamics define and describe the motion of water within the oceans.
Ocean temperature and motion fields can be separated into three distinct layers: mixed (surface) layer, upper ocean (above the thermocline), and deep ocean. Ocean currents are measured in units of sverdrup (Sv), where 1 Sv is equivalent to a volume flow rate of 1,000,000 m3 (35,000,000 cu ft) per second.
There are two main types of currents, surface currents and deep water currents. Generally surface currents are driven by wind systems and deep water currents are driven by differences in water density due to variations in water temperature and salinity.

Wind-driven circulation
Surface oceanic currents are driven by wind currents, the large scale prevailing winds drive major persistent ocean currents, and seasonal or occasional winds drive currents of similar persistence to the winds that drive them, and the Coriolis effect plays a major role in their development. The Ekman spiral velocity distribution results in the currents flowing at an angle to the driving winds, and they develop typical clockwise spirals in the northern hemisphere and counter-clockwise rotation in the southern hemisphere.
In addition, the areas of surface ocean currents move somewhat with the seasons; this is most notable in equatorial currents.
Deep ocean basins generally have a non-symmetric surface current, in that the eastern equator-ward flowing branch is broad and diffuse whereas the pole-ward flowing western boundary current is relatively narrow.

Thermohaline circulation
Large scale currents are driven by gradients in water density, which in turn depend on variations in temperature and salinity. This thermohaline circulation is also known as the ocean's conveyor belt. Where significant vertical movement of ocean currents is observed, this is known as upwelling and downwelling. The adjective thermohaline derives from thermo- referring to temperature and -haline referring to salt content, factors which together determine the density of seawater.
The thermohaline circulation is a part of the large-scale ocean circulation that is driven by global density gradients created by surface heat and freshwater fluxes. Wind-driven surface currents (such as the Gulf Stream) travel polewards from the equatorial Atlantic Ocean, cooling en route, and eventually sinking at high latitudes (forming North Atlantic Deep Water). This dense water then flows into the ocean basins. While the bulk of it upwells in the Southern Ocean, the oldest waters (with a transit time of around 1000 years) upwell in the North Pacific. Extensive mixing therefore takes place between the ocean basins, reducing differences between them and making the Earth's oceans a global system. On their journey, the water masses transport both energy (in the form of heat) and matter (solids, dissolved substances and gases) around the globe. As such, the state of the circulation has a large impact on the climate of the Earth. The thermohaline circulation is sometimes called the ocean conveyor belt, the great ocean conveyor, or the global conveyor belt. On occasion, it is imprecisely used to refer to the meridional overturning circulation, (MOC).
Since the 2000s an international program called Argo has been mapping the temperature and salinity structure of the ocean with a fleet of automated platforms that float with the ocean currents. The information gathered will help explain the role the oceans play in the earth's climate.

Effects on climate and ecology
Ocean currents affect temperatures throughout the world. For example, the ocean current that brings warm water up the north Atlantic to northwest Europe also cumulatively and slowly blocks ice from forming along the seashores, which would also block ships from entering and exiting inland waterways and seaports, hence ocean currents play a decisive role in influencing the climates of regions through which they flow. Ocean currents are important in the study of marine debris.

Upwellings and cold ocean water currents flowing from polar and sub-polar regions bring in nutrients that support plankton growth, which are crucial prey items for several key species in marine ecosystems.
Ocean currents are also important in the dispersal and distribution of many organisms, including those with pelagic egg or larval stages. An example is the life-cycle of the European Eel. Terrestrial species, for example tortoises and lizards, can be carried on floating debris by currents to colonise new terrestrial areas and islands.

Ocean currents and climate change
The continued rise of atmospheric temperatures is anticipated to have various effects on the strength of surface ocean currents, wind-driven circulation and dispersal patterns. Ocean currents play a significant role in influencing climate, and shifts in climate in turn impact ocean currents.

Over the last century, reconstructed sea surface temperature data reveal that western boundary currents are heating at double the rate of the global average. These observations indicate that the western boundary currents are likely intensifying due to this change in temperature, and may continue to grow stronger in the near future. There is evidence that surface warming due to anthropogenic climate change has accelerated upper ocean currents in 77% of the global ocean. Specifically, increased vertical stratification due to surface warming intensifies upper ocean currents, while changes in horizontal density gradients caused by differential warming across different ocean regions results in the acceleration of surface zonal currents.
There are suggestions that the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) is in danger of collapsing due to climate change, which would have extreme impacts on the climate of northern Europe and more widely, although this topic is controversial and remains an active area of research. The "State of the cryosphere" report, dedicates significant space to AMOC, saying it may be en route to collapse because of ice melt and water warming. In the same time, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) is also slowing down and is expected to lose 20% of its power by the year 2050, "with widespread impacts on ocean circulation and climate". UNESCO mentions that the report in the first time "notes a growing scientific consensus that melting Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, among other factors, may be slowing important ocean currents at both poles, with potentially dire consequences for a much colder northern Europe and greater sea-level rise along the U.S. East Coast."
In addition to water surface temperatures, the wind systems are a crucial determinant of ocean currents. Wind wave systems influence oceanic heat exchange, the condition of the sea surface, and can alter ocean currents. In the North Atlantic, equatorial Pacific, and Southern Ocean, increased wind speeds as well as significant wave heights have been attributed to climate change and natural processes combined. In the East Australian Current, global warming has also been accredited to increased wind stress curl, which intensifies these currents, and may even indirectly increase sea levels, due to the additional warming created by stronger currents.
As ocean circulation changes due to climate, typical distribution patterns are also changing. The dispersal patterns of marine organisms depend on oceanographic conditions, which as a result, influence the biological composition of oceans. Due to the patchiness of the natural ecological world, dispersal is a species survival mechanism for various organisms. With strengthened boundary currents moving toward the poles, it is expected that some marine species will be redirected to the poles and greater depths. The strengthening or weakening of typical dispersal pathways by increased temperatures are expected to not only impact the survival of native marine species due to inability to replenish their meta populations but also may increase the prevalence of invasive species. In Japanese corals and macroalgae, the unusual dispersal pattern of organisms toward the poles may destabilize native species.

Economic importance
Knowledge of  surface ocean currents is essential in reducing costs of shipping, since traveling with them reduces fuel costs. In the wind powered sailing-ship era, knowledge of wind patterns and ocean currents was even more essential. Using ocean currents to help their ships into harbor and using currents such as the gulf stream to get back home. The lack of understanding of ocean currents during that time period is hypothesized to be one of the contributing factors to exploration failure. The Gulf Stream and the Canary current keep western European countries warmer and less variable, while at the same latitude North America's weather was colder. A good example of this is the Agulhas Current (down along eastern Africa), which long prevented sailors from reaching India.
In recent times, around-the-world sailing competitors make good use of surface currents to build and maintain speed.
Ocean currents can also be used for marine power generation, with areas of Japan, Florida and Hawaii being considered for test projects. The utilization of currents today can still impact global trade, it can reduce the cost and emissions of shipping vessels. 

Ocean currents can also impact the fishing industry, examples of this include the Tsugaru, Oyashio and Kuroshio currents all of which influence the western North Pacific temperature, which has been shown to be a habitat predictor for the Skipjack tuna. It has also been shown that it is not just local currents that can affect a country's economy, but neighboring currents can influence the viability of local fishing industries.

Distribution
Currents of the Arctic Ocean

Baffin Island Current – Arctic Ocean current
Beaufort Gyre – Wind-driven ocean current in the Arctic Ocean polar region
East Greenland Current – Current from Fram Strait to Cape Farewell off the eastern coat of Greenland
East Iceland Current – Cold water ocean current that forms as a branch of the East Greenland Current
Labrador Current – Cold current in the Atlantic ocean along the coasts of Labrador, Newfoundland and Nova Scotia
North Icelandic Jet – Deep-reaching current that flows along the continental slope of Iceland
Norwegian Current – Current that flows northeasternly along the Atlantic coast of Norway
Transpolar Drift Stream – Current in the Arctic Ocean
West Greenland Current – Weak cold water current that flows to the north along the west coast of Greenland
West Spitsbergen Current – Warm, salty current that runs poleward just west of Spitsbergen
Currents of the Atlantic Ocean

Angola Current – Temporary ocean surface current
Antilles Current – Ocean current
Atlantic meridional overturning circulation – System of surface and deep currents in the Atlantic Ocean
Azores Current – Ocean current in the North Atlantic Ocean
Benguela Current – Ocean current in the South Atlantic
Brazil Current – Water current along Brazil's southern coast
Canary Current – Wind-driven surface current that is part of the North Atlantic Gyre
Cape Horn Current – Cold water current that flows west-to-east around Cape Horn
Caribbean Current – Atlantic Ocean current
East Greenland Current – Current from Fram Strait to Cape Farewell off the eastern coat of Greenland
East Iceland Current – Cold water ocean current that forms as a branch of the East Greenland Current
Equatorial Counter Current – Shallow eastward flowing current found in the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific Oceans
Falkland Current – Northward cold water Atlantic Ocean current
Florida Current – Thermal ocean current
Guinea Current – Atlantic warm-water current off West Africa
Gulf Stream – Warm Atlantic Ocean current
Irminger Current
Labrador Current – Cold current in the Atlantic ocean along the coasts of Labrador, Newfoundland and Nova Scotia
Lomonosov Current – Deep current in the Atlantic Ocean. from the coast of Brazil to the Gulf of Guinea
Loop Current – Ocean current between Cuba and Yucatán Peninsula
North Atlantic Current – Current of the Atlantic Ocean
North Brazil Current – North Atlantic ocean current
North Equatorial Current – Current in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans
Norwegian Current – Current that flows northeasternly along the Atlantic coast of Norway
Portugal Current – Weak ocean current that flows south along the coast of Portugal
South Atlantic Current – Eastward ocean current, fed by the Brazil Current
South Equatorial Current – Ocean current in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Ocean
West Greenland Current – Weak cold water current that flows to the north along the west coast of Greenland
West Spitsbergen Current – Warm, salty current that runs poleward just west of Spitsbergen
Currents of the Indian Ocean

Agulhas Current – Western boundary current of the southwest Indian Ocean that flows down the east coast of Africa
Agulhas Return Current – Ocean current in the southern Indian Ocean
East Madagascar Current – Oceanic flow feature near Madagascar
Equatorial Counter Current – Shallow eastward flowing current found in the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific Oceans
Indian Monsoon Current – Seasonally-varying ocean current regime in the northern Indian Ocean
Indonesian Throughflow – Ocean current
Leeuwin Current – Ocean current off  Western Australia
Madagascar Current – Ocean current in the West Indian Ocean
Mozambique Current – Warm ocean current in the Indian Ocean
North Madagascar Current – Ocean current near Madagascar that flows into the South Equatorial Current
Somali Current – Ocean boundary current that flows along the coast of Somalia and Oman in the Western Indian Ocean
South Equatorial Current – Ocean current in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Ocean
Southwest Madagascar Coastal Current – Warm poleward ocean current flowing in the south-west of Madagascar
West Australian Current – Cool oceanic current
Currents of the Pacific Ocean

Alaska Current – Warm-water current flowing nortwards along the coast of British Columbia and the Alaska Panhandle
Aleutian Current – Eastward-flowing ocean current which lies north of the North Pacific Current;
California Current – Pacific Ocean current
Cape Horn Current – Cold water current that flows west-to-east around Cape Horn
Cromwell Current – Eastward-flowing subsurface current that extends along the equator in the Pacific Ocean
Davidson Current – Countercurrent of the Pacific Ocean
East Australian Current – Currents of the Pacific Ocean
East Korea Warm Current – Ocean current in the Sea of Japan
Equatorial Counter Current – Shallow eastward flowing current found in the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific Oceans
Humboldt Current – Current of the Pacific Ocean
Indonesian Throughflow – Ocean current
Kamchatka Current – Pacific Ocean current
Kuroshio Current – North flowing ocean current on the west side of the North Pacific Ocean
Mindanao Current – Narrow, southward-flowing ocean current along the southeastern coast of the Philippines
Mindanao Eddy – Semi-permanent cold-ring eddy formed in the retroflection area of the Mindanao Current.
North Equatorial Current – Current in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans
North Korea Cold Current – Cold water current in the Sea of Japan
North Pacific Current – Ocean current, Japan to British Columbia
Oyashio Current – Cold subarctic ocean current in the Pacific Ocean
South Equatorial Current – Ocean current in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Ocean
Subtropical Countercurrent – Narrow eastward ocean current in the central North Pacific Ocean
Tasman Front – Pacific Ocean current
Tasman Outflow – Deepwater current that flows from the Pacific Ocean past Tasmania into the Indian Ocean
Currents of the Southern Ocean

Antarctic Circumpolar Current – Ocean current that flows clockwise from west to east around Antarctica
Tasman Outflow – Deepwater current that flows from the Pacific Ocean past Tasmania into the Indian Ocean
Kerguelen deep western boundary current
Oceanic gyres

Beaufort Gyre – Wind-driven ocean current in the Arctic Ocean polar region
Indian Ocean Gyre – Major oceanic gyre in the Indian Ocean
North Atlantic Gyre – Major circular system of ocean currents
North Pacific Gyre – Major circulating system of ocean currents
Ross Gyre – Circulating system of ocean currents in the Ross Sea
South Atlantic Gyre – Subtropical gyre in the south Atlantic Ocean
South Pacific Gyre – Major circulating system of ocean currents
Weddell Gyre – One of two gyres within the Southern Ocean

See also
Currentology – Science that studies the internal movements of water masses
Deep ocean water – Cold, salty water deep below the surface of Earth's oceans
Fish migration – Movement of fishes from one part of a water body to another on a regular basis
Geostrophic current – Oceanic flow in which the pressure gradient force is balanced by the Coriolis effect
Latitude of the Gulf Stream and the Gulf Stream north wall index
List of ocean circulation models
Marine habitats § Ocean currents
Marine current power – Extraction of power from ocean currents
Ocean gyre – Any large system of circulating ocean surface currents
Physical oceanography – Study of physical conditions and processes within the ocean
Subsurface ocean current – Oceanic currents that flow beneath surface currents
Thermohaline circulation – Part of large-scale ocean circulation
Tidal current – Flow of water induced by astronomical gravitational effects
Volta do mar – Archaic navigational technique

References
Further reading
Hansen, B.; Østerhus, S; Quadfasel, D; Turrell, W (2004). "Already the day after tomorrow?". Science. 305 (5686): 953–954. doi:10.1126/science.1100085. PMID 15310882. S2CID 12968045.
Kerr, Richard A. (2004). "A slowing cog in the North Atlantic ocean's climate machine". Science. 304 (5669): 371–372. doi:10.1126/science.304.5669.371a. PMID 15087513. S2CID 42150417.
Munday, Phillip L.; Jones, Geoffrey P.; Pratchett, Morgan S.; Williams, Ashley J. (2008). "Climate change and the future for coral reef fishes". Fish and Fisheries. 9 (3): 261–285. Bibcode:2008AqFF....9..261M. doi:10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00281.x.
Rahmstorf, S. (2003). "Thermohaline circulation: The current climate". Nature. 421 (6924): 699. Bibcode:2003Natur.421..699R. doi:10.1038/421699a. PMID 12610602. S2CID 4414604.
Roemmich, D. (2007). "Physical oceanography: Super spin in the southern seas". Nature. 449 (7158): 34–35. Bibcode:2007Natur.449...34R. doi:10.1038/449034a. PMID 17805284. S2CID 2951110.

External links

Current global map of sea surface currents

================================================================================

# Salinity

Salinity () is the saltiness or amount of salt dissolved in a body of water, called saline water (see also soil salinity). It is usually measured in g/L or g/kg (grams of salt per liter/kilogram of water; the latter is dimensionless and equal to ‰). 
Salinity is an important factor in determining many aspects of the chemistry of natural waters and of biological processes within it, and is a thermodynamic state variable that, along with temperature and pressure, governs physical characteristics like the density and heat capacity of the water. These in turn are important for understanding ocean currents and heat exchange with the atmosphere.
A contour line of constant salinity is called an isohaline, or sometimes isohale.

Definitions
Salinity in rivers, lakes, and the ocean is conceptually simple, but technically challenging to define and measure precisely. Conceptually the salinity is the quantity of dissolved salt content of the water. Salts are compounds like sodium chloride, magnesium sulfate, potassium nitrate, and sodium bicarbonate which dissolve into ions. The concentration of dissolved chloride ions is sometimes referred to as chlorinity. Operationally, dissolved matter is defined as that which can pass through a very fine filter (historically a filter with a pore size of 0.45 μm, but later usually 0.2 μm). Salinity can be expressed in the form of a mass fraction, i.e. the mass of the dissolved material in a unit mass of solution.
Seawater typically has a mass salinity of around 35 g/kg, although lower values are typical near coasts where rivers enter the ocean. Rivers and lakes can have a wide range of salinities, from less than 0.01 g/kg to a few g/kg, although there are many places where higher salinities are found. The Dead Sea has a salinity of more than 200 g/kg. Precipitation typically has a TDS of 20 mg/kg or less.
Whatever pore size is used in the definition, the resulting salinity value of a given sample of natural water will not vary by more than a few percent (%). Physical oceanographers working in the abyssal ocean, however, are often concerned with precision and intercomparability of measurements by different researchers, at different times, to almost five significant digits. A bottled seawater product known as IAPSO Standard Seawater is used by oceanographers to standardize their measurements with enough precision to meet this requirement.

Composition
Measurement and definition difficulties arise because natural waters contain a complex mixture of many different elements from different sources (not all from dissolved salts) in different molecular forms. The chemical properties of some of these forms depend on temperature and pressure. Many of these forms are difficult to measure with high accuracy, and in any case complete chemical analysis is not practical when analyzing multiple samples. Different practical definitions of salinity result from different attempts to account for these problems, to different levels of precision, while still remaining reasonably easy to use.
For practical reasons salinity is usually related to the sum of masses of a subset of these dissolved chemical constituents (so-called solution salinity), rather than to the unknown mass of salts that gave rise to this composition (an exception is when artificial seawater is created).  For many purposes this sum can be limited to a set of eight major ions in natural waters, although for seawater at highest precision an additional seven minor ions are also included.  The major ions dominate the inorganic composition of most (but by no means all) natural waters. Exceptions include some pit lakes and waters from some hydrothermal springs.
The concentrations of dissolved gases like oxygen and nitrogen are not usually included in descriptions of salinity. However, carbon dioxide gas, which when dissolved is partially converted into carbonates and bicarbonates, is often included. Silicon in the form of silicic acid, which usually appears as a neutral molecule in the pH range of most natural waters, may also be included for some purposes (e.g., when salinity/density relationships are being investigated).

Seawater
The term salinity is, for oceanographers, usually associated with one of a set of specific measurement techniques. As the dominant techniques evolve, so do different descriptions of salinity. Salinities were measured mainly using titration-based techniques before the 1980s. Titration with silver nitrate could be used to determine the concentration of halide ions (mainly chlorine and bromine) to give a chlorinity. The chlorinity was then multiplied by a factor to account for all other constituents. The resulting 'Knudsen salinities' are expressed in units of parts per thousand (ppt or ‰).
The use of electrical conductivity measurements to estimate the ionic content of seawater led to the development of the scale called the practical salinity scale 1978 (PSS-78). Salinities measured using PSS-78 do not have units. The suffix psu or PSU (denoting practical salinity unit) is sometimes added to PSS-78 measurement values. The addition of PSU as a unit after the value is "formally incorrect and strongly discouraged".
In 2010, a new standard for the properties of seawater called the thermodynamic equation of seawater 2010 (TEOS-10) was introduced, advocating absolute salinity as a replacement for practical salinity, and conservative temperature as a replacement for potential temperature. This standard includes a new scale called the reference composition salinity scale. Absolute salinities on this scale are expressed as a mass fraction, in grams per kilogram of solution. Salinities on this scale are determined by combining electrical conductivity measurements with other information that accounts for regional changes in seawater composition. They can also be determined by making direct density measurements.
A sample of seawater from most locations with a chlorinity of 19.37 ppt will have a Knudsen salinity of 35.00 ppt, a PSS-78 practical salinity of about 35.0, and a TEOS-10 absolute salinity of about 35.2 g/kg. The electrical conductivity of this water at a temperature of 15 °C is 42.9 mS/cm.
On a global scale, human-caused climate change has contributed to observed changes in surface and subsurface salinity since the 1950s. Projections of surface salinity changes throughout the 21st century indicate that fresh ocean regions will continue to get fresher and salty regions will continue to get saltier.
Salinity serves as a tracer of different masses. Surface water is pulled in to replace the sinking water, which in turn eventually becomes cold and salty enough to sink. Salinity distribution contributes to shaping the oceanic circulation.

Lakes and rivers
Limnologists and chemists often define salinity in terms of mass of salt per unit volume, expressed in units of mg/L or g/L. It is implied, although often not stated, that this value applies accurately only at some reference temperature because solution volume varies with temperature. Values presented in this way are typically accurate to the order of 1%. Limnologists also use electrical conductivity, or "reference conductivity", as a proxy for salinity. This measurement may be corrected for temperature effects, and is usually expressed in units of μS/cm.
A river or lake water with a salinity of around 70 mg/L will typically have a specific conductivity at 25 °C of between 80 and 130 μS/cm. The actual ratio depends on the ions present. The actual conductivity usually changes by about 2% per degree Celsius, so the measured conductivity at 5 °C might only be in the range of 50–80 μS/cm.
Direct density measurements are also used to estimate salinities, particularly in highly saline lakes. Sometimes density at a specific temperature is used as a proxy for salinity. At other times an empirical salinity/density relationship developed for a particular body of water is used to estimate the salinity of samples from a measured density.

Classification of water bodies based upon salinity
Marine waters are those of the ocean, another term for which is euhaline seas. The salinity of euhaline seas is 30 to 35 ‰. Brackish seas or waters have salinity in the range of 0.5 to 29 ‰ and metahaline seas from 36 to 40 ‰. These waters are all regarded as thalassic because their salinity is derived from the ocean and defined as homoiohaline if salinity does not vary much over time (essentially constant). The table on the right, modified from Por (1972), follows the "Venice system" (1959).
In contrast to homoiohaline environments are certain poikilohaline environments (which may also be thalassic) in which the salinity variation is biologically significant. Poikilohaline water salinities may range anywhere from 0.5 to greater than 300 ‰. The important characteristic is that these waters tend to vary in salinity over some biologically meaningful range seasonally or on some other roughly comparable time scale. Put simply, these are bodies of water with quite variable salinity.
Highly saline water, from which salts crystallize (or are about to), is referred to as brine.

Environmental considerations
Salinity is an ecological factor of considerable importance, influencing the types of organisms that live in a body of water. As well, salinity influences the kinds of plants that will grow either in a water body, or on land fed by a water (or by a groundwater).  A plant adapted to saline conditions is called a halophyte. A halophyte which is tolerant to residual sodium carbonate salinity are called  glasswort or saltwort or barilla plants. Organisms (mostly bacteria) that can live in very salty conditions are classified as extremophiles, or halophiles specifically. An organism that can withstand a wide range of salinities is euryhaline.
Salts are expensive to remove from water, and salt content is an important factor in water use, factoring into potability and suitability for irrigation.  Increases in salinity have been observed in lakes and rivers in the United States, due to common road salt and other salt de-icers in runoff.
The degree of salinity in oceans is a driver of the world's ocean circulation, where density changes due to both salinity changes and temperature changes at the surface of the ocean produce changes in buoyancy, which cause the sinking and rising of water masses. Changes in the salinity of the oceans are thought to contribute to global changes in carbon dioxide as more saline waters are less soluble to carbon dioxide. In addition, during glacial periods, the hydrography is such that a possible cause of reduced circulation is the production of stratified oceans. In such cases, it is more difficult to subduct water through the thermohaline circulation. 
Not only is salinity a driver of ocean circulation, but changes in ocean circulation also affect salinity, particularly in the subpolar North Atlantic where from 1990 to 2010 increased contributions of Greenland meltwater were counteracted by increased northward transport of salty Atlantic waters. However, North Atlantic waters have become fresher since the mid-2010s due to increased Greenland meltwater flux.

See also
Desalination for economic purposes
Desalination of water
Desalination of soil: soil salinity control
Sodium adsorption ratio
Measuring salinity
Salinometer
Salinity by biologic context
In organisms generally, with particular emphasis on human health
Electrolytes
Fluid balance
Hypernatremia
Hyponatremia
Salt poisoning
In plants
Arabidopsis thaliana responses to salinity
In fish
Stenohaline fish
Euryhaline fish
Salinity by geologic context
Fresh water
Seawater
Soil salinity
Thermohaline circulation
Paleosalinity
CORA dataset data on salinity of global oceans
General cases of solute concentration
Osmotic concentration
Tonicity

References
Further reading
Lewis, Edward Lyn (1982). "The practical salinity scale of 1978 and its antecedents" (PDF). Marine Geodesy. 5 (4): 350–357. Bibcode:1982MarGe...5..350L. doi:10.1080/15210608209379432. Retrieved 2024-08-25.
Mantyla, Arnold W. (April 1987). "Standard Seawater Comparisons updated". Journal of Physical Oceanography (reprinted from its original publication in IEEE Journal of Oceanic engineering, vol. OE5, n° 1, Jan. 1980). 17 (4): 543–548. Bibcode:1987JPO....17..543M. doi:10.1175/1520-0485(1987)017<0543:sscu>2.0.co;2.

External links
"Thermophysical properties of seawater". web.mit.edu (MIT page on seawater properties, with Matlab, EES and Excel VBA library routines). Retrieved 2024-08-25.
"Early Determination of Salinity: from Ancient Concepts to Challenger Results". salinometry.com (History of the salinity determination). Retrieved 2024-08-25.
"Practical Salinity Scale — 1978". salinometry.com. Retrieved 2024-08-25.
"Practical salinity calculator". salinometry.com. Retrieved 2024-08-25.
"Algorithms on sea water". code10.info (equations and algorithms to calculate fundamental properties of sea water). Retrieved 2024-08-25.
"Equations and algorithms to calculate salinity of inland waters". eos.ubc.ca. Retrieved 2024-08-25. (dead link)

================================================================================

# Abyssal zone

The abyssal zone or abyssopelagic zone is a layer of the pelagic zone of the ocean. The word abyss comes from the Greek word ἄβυσσος (ábussos), meaning "bottomless". At depths of 4,000–6,000 m (13,000–20,000 ft), this zone remains in perpetual darkness. It covers 83% of the total area of the ocean and 60% of Earth's surface. The abyssal zone has temperatures around 2–3 °C (36–37 °F) through the large majority of its mass. The water pressure can reach up to 76 MPa (750 atm; 11,000 psi).
As there is no light, photosynthesis cannot occur, and there are no plants producing molecular oxygen (O2), which instead primarily comes from ice that had melted long ago from the polar regions. The water along the seafloor of this zone is largely devoid of molecular oxygen, resulting in a death trap for organisms unable to quickly return to the oxygen-enriched water above or to survive in the low-oxygen environment. This region also contains a much higher concentration of nutrient salts, like nitrogen, phosphorus, and silica, due to the large amount of dead organic material that drifts down from the ocean zones above and decomposes.
The region below the abyssal zone is the sparsely inhabited hadal zone. The region above is the bathyal zone.

Trenches
The deep trenches or fissures that plunge down thousands of meters below the ocean floor (for example, the mid-oceanic trenches such as the Mariana Trench in the Pacific) are almost unexplored. Previously, only the bathyscaphe Trieste, the remote control submarine Kaikō and the Nereus have been able to descend to these depths. However, as of March 25, 2012 one vehicle, the Deepsea Challenger, had penetrated to a depth of 10,898 meters (35,756 ft).

Ecosystem
The relative sparsity of primary producers means that the majority of organisms living in the abyssal zone depend on the marine snow that falls from oceanic layers above. The biomass of the abyssal zone actually increases near the seafloor as most of the decomposing material and decomposers rest on the seabed.
The composition of the abyssal plain depends on the depth of the sea floor. Above 4000 meters the seafloor usually consists of calcareous shells of foraminifera, zooplankton, and phytoplankton. At depths greater than 4000 meters shells dissolve, leaving behind a seafloor of brown clay and silica from dead zooplankton and phytoplankton. Chemosynthetic bacteria support large and diverse communities near hydrothermal vents, filling a similar role in these ecosystems as plants do in the sunlit regions above.
A new insight into the complexity of the abyssal environment has been provided by a team of researchers from the Scottish Society of Marine Sciences. They have found that manganese nodules on the deep sea floor produce free oxygen from water molecules.
The manganese nodules act as a kind of battery as they contain different metals, and they release oxygen into the environment. Because it was previously thought that only plants and algae produce dark oxygen (oxygen produced without light), this can be seen as a scientific breakthrough.

Biological adaptations
Organisms that live at this depth have had to evolve to overcome challenges provided by the abyssal zone. Fish and invertebrates had to evolve to withstand the sheer cold and intense pressure found at this level. Not only did they have to find ways to hunt and survive in constant darkness, but they also had to thrive in an ecosystem that has less oxygen and biomass, energy sources and prey, than the upper zones. To survive in these conditions, many fish and other organisms developed a much slower metabolism, and require much less oxygen than those in upper zones. Many animals also move very slowly to conserve energy. Their reproduction rates are also very slow, to decrease competition and conserve energy. Animals here typically have flexible stomachs and mouths, so that when scarce prey are found they can consume as many as possible.

Other challenges faced by life in the abyssal zone are the pressure and darkness caused by the zone's depth. Many organisms living in this zone have evolved to minimize internal air spaces, such as swim bladders. This adaptation helps to protect them from the extreme pressure, which can reach around 75 MPa (11,000 psi). The absence of light also spawned many different adaptations, such as having large eyes and the ability to produce their own light (bioluminescence). Large eyes would allow the detection and use of any light available, no matter how small. Commonly, animals in the abyssal zone are bioluminescent, producing blue light, because light in the blue wavelength range is attenuated over greater travel distances than other wavelengths. Due to this lack of light, complex patterns and bright colors are not needed. Most fish species have evolved to be transparent, red, or black so that they better blend in with the darkness and do not waste energy on developing and maintaining bright or complex patterns.

Animals
The abyssal zone is made up of many different types of organisms, including microorganisms, crustaceans, molluscs (bivalves, snails, and cephalopods), different classes of fishes, and possibly some animals that have yet to be discovered. Most of the fish species in this zone are described as demersal or benthopelagic fishes. Demersal fish are fish whose habitats are on or near (typically less than five meters from) the seafloor. Most fish species fit into that classification, because the seafloor contains most of the abyssal zone's nutrients; therefore, the most complex food web or greatest biomass would be in this region of the zone.
Organisms in the abyssal zone rely on the natural processes of higher ocean layers. When animals from higher ocean levels die, their carcasses occasionally drift down to the abyssal zone, where organisms in the deep can feed on them. When a whale carcass falls down to the abyssal zone, this is called a whale fall. The carcass of the whale can create complex ecosystems for organisms in the depths.
Benthic organisms in the abyssal zone would need to have evolved morphological traits that could either keep them out of oxygen-depleted water above the sea floor or enable them to extract oxygen from the water above, while also allowing the animal access to the seafloor and the nutrients located there. There are also animals that spend their time in the upper portion of the abyssal zone, some of which even occasionally spend time in the zone directly above, the bathyal zone. While there are a number of different fish species representing many different groups and classes, like Actinopterygii (ray-finned fish), there are no known members of the class Chondrichthyes (animals such as sharks, rays, and chimaeras) that make the abyssal zone their primary or constant habitat. Whether this is due to the limited resources, energy availability, or other physiological constraints is unknown. Most Chondrichthyes species only go as deep as the bathyal zone.
Creatures that live in the abyssal zone include:

Tripod fish (Bathypterois grallator): their habitat is along the ocean floor, usually around 4,720 m below sea level. Their pelvic fins and caudal fin have long bony rays protruding from them. They face the current while standing still on their long rays. Once they sense food nearby, they use their large pectoral fins to hit the unsuspecting prey towards their mouth. Each member of this species has both male and female reproductive organs so that if a mate cannot be found, they can self-fertilize.
Dumbo octopus: this octopus usually lives at a depth between 1,000 and 7,000 meters, deeper than any other known octopus. They use the fins on top of their head, which look like flapping ears, to hover over the sea floor looking for food. They use their arms to help change directions or crawl along the seafloor. To combat the intense pressure of the abyssal zone, this octopus species lost its ink sac during evolution. They also use their strand-like structured suction cups to help detect predators, food, and other aspects of their environment.
Cusk eel (genus Bassozetus): there are no known fish that live at depths greater than the cusk eel. The depth of the cusk eel habitat can be as great as 8,370 meters below sea level. This animal's ventral fins are specialized forked barbel-like organs that act as sensory organs. Cusk eels produce sounds to mate. Male cusk eels have two pairs of sonic muscles, while female cusk eels have three.
Abyssal grenadier: this resident of the abyssal zone is known to live at depths ranging from 800 and 4,000 meters. It has extremely large eyes, but a small mouth. It is thought to be a semelparous species, meaning it only reproduces once and then dies. This is seen as a way for the organism to conserve energy and have a higher chance of having some healthy strong children. This reproductive strategy could be very useful in low energy environments such as the abyssal zone.
Pseudoliparis swirei: the Mariana snailfish, or Mariana hadal snailfish, is a species of snailfish found at hadal depths in the Mariana Trench in the western Pacific Ocean. It is known from a depth range of 6,198–8,076 m (20,335–26,496 ft), including a capture at 7,966 m (26,135 ft), which is possibly the record for a fish caught on the seafloor.

Environmental concerns
Climate change has had negative effects on the abyssal zone. Due to the zone's depth, increasing global temperatures do not affect it as quickly or drastically as the rest of the world, but the zone is still afflicted by ocean acidification. Pollutants, such as plastics, are also present in this zone. Plastics are especially bad for the abyssal zone because these organisms have evolved to eat or try to eat anything that moves or appears to be detritus, resulting in organisms consuming plastics instead of nutrients. Both ocean acidification and pollution are decreasing the already small biomass that resides within the abyssal zone.
Another problem caused by humans is overfishing. Even though no fishery can fish for organisms anywhere near the abyssal zone, they can still cause harm in deeper waters. The abyssal zone depends on dead organisms from the upper zones sinking to the seafloor, since the ecosystem lacks producers due to a lack of sunlight. As fish and other animals are removed from the ocean, the frequency and amount of dead material reaching the abyssal zone decreases.
Deep sea mining operations could cause problems for the abyssal zone in the future. The talks and planning for this industry are already under way. Deep sea mining could be disastrous for this extremely fragile ecosystem since there are many ecological dangers posed by mining for deep sea minerals. Mining could increase the amount of pollution not only in the abyssal zone, but in the ocean as a whole, and would physically destroy habitats and the seafloor.
Sediment plumes generated by mining activities can spread widely, affecting filter feeders and smothering marine life. The potential release of toxic chemicals and heavy metals from mining equipment and disturbed seabed materials could lead to chemical pollution, while noise from machinery can disrupt the behavior and communication of marine animals. Physical disturbances to the seabed may destroy geological features and their associated ecosystems. Furthermore, changes in water quality and the disruption of carbon sequestration processes, where organic carbon is stored in the deep sea, could have broader environmental impacts, including contributing to climate change. The slow rate of change in deep-sea environments and the long lifespans and reproductive cycles of abyssal species mean that recovery from such disturbances could take decades or centuries.

See also

Abyssal plain
Beebe Hydrothermal Vent Field
Deep sea
Deep sea community
Deep-sea fish    
Mariana Trench

== References ==

================================================================================

# Acid mine drainage

Acid mine drainage, acid and metalliferous drainage (AMD), or acid rock drainage (ARD) is the outflow of acidic water from metal mines and coal mines.
Acid rock drainage occurs naturally within some environments as part of the rock weathering process but is exacerbated by large-scale earth disturbances characteristic of mining and other large construction activities, usually within rocks containing an abundance of sulfide minerals. Areas where the earth has been disturbed (e.g. construction sites or highway construction) may create acid rock drainage. In many localities, the liquid that drains from coal stocks, coal handling facilities, coal washeries, and coal waste tips can be highly acidic, and in such cases it is treated as acid rock drainage. These, combined with reduced pH, have a detrimental impact on the streams' aquatic environments.
The same type of chemical reactions and processes may occur through the disturbance of acid sulfate soils formed under coastal or estuarine conditions after the last major sea level rise, and constitutes a similar environmental hazard.

Nomenclature
Historically, the acidic discharges from active or abandoned mines were called acid mine drainage, or AMD. The term acid rock drainage, or ARD, was introduced in the 1980s and 1990s to indicate that acidic drainage can originate from sources other than mines. For example, a paper presented in 1991 at a major international conference on this subject was titled: "The Prediction of Acid Rock Drainage – Lessons from the Database". Both AMD and ARD refer to low pH or acidic waters caused by the oxidation of sulfide minerals, though ARD is the more generic name.
In cases where drainage from a mine is not acidic and has dissolved metals or metalloids, or was originally acidic, but has been neutralized along its flow path, then it is described as "neutral mine drainage", "mining-influenced water" or otherwise. None of these other names have gained general acceptance.

Occurrence
Sub-surface mining often progresses below the water table, so water must be constantly pumped out of the mine in order to prevent flooding. When a mine is abandoned, the pumping ceases, and water floods the mine. This introduction of water is the initial step in most acid rock drainage situations. Tailings piles or ponds, mine waste rock dumps, and coal spoils are also an important source of acid mine drainage.
After being exposed to air and water, oxidation of metal sulfides (often pyrite, which is iron-sulfide) within the surrounding rock and overburden generates acidity. Colonies of bacteria and archaea greatly accelerate the decomposition of metal ions, although the reactions also occur in an abiotic environment. These microbes, called extremophiles for their ability to survive in harsh conditions, occur naturally in the rock, but limited water and oxygen supplies usually keep their numbers low. Extremophiles known as acidophiles especially favor the low pH levels of abandoned mines. In particular, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans is a key contributor to pyrite oxidation.
Metal mines may generate highly acidic discharges where the ore is a sulfide mineral or is associated with pyrite. In these cases the predominant metal ion may not be iron but rather zinc, copper, or nickel. The most commonly mined ore of copper, chalcopyrite, is itself a copper-iron-sulfide and occurs with a range of other sulfides. Thus, copper mines are often major culprits of acid mine drainage.
At some mines, acidic drainage is detected within 2–5 years after mining begins, whereas at other mines, it is not detected for several decades. In addition, acidic drainage may be generated for decades or centuries after it is first detected. For this reason, acid mine drainage is considered a serious long-term environmental problem associated with mining.

Chemistry
The chemistry of oxidation of pyrites, the production of ferrous ions and subsequently ferric ions, is very complex, and this complexity has considerably inhibited the design of effective treatment options.
Although a host of chemical processes contribute to acid mine drainage, pyrite oxidation is by far the greatest contributor. A general equation for this process is:

2 FeS2(s) + 7 O2(g) + 2 H2O(l)  →  2 Fe2+(aq) + 4 SO2−4(aq) + 4 H+(aq)
The oxidation of the sulfide to sulfate solubilizes the ferrous iron (iron(II)), which is subsequently oxidized to ferric iron (iron(III)):

4 Fe2+(aq) + O2(g) + 4 H+(aq)  →  4 Fe3+(aq) + 2 H2O(l)
Either of these reactions can occur spontaneously or can be catalyzed by microorganisms that derive energy from the oxidation reaction.  The ferric cations produced can also oxidize additional pyrite and reduce into ferrous ions:

FeS2(s) + 14 Fe3+(aq) + 8 H2O(l)  →  15 Fe2+(aq) + 2 SO2−4(aq) + 16 H+(aq)
The net effect of these reactions is to release H+, which lowers the pH and maintains the solubility of the ferric ion.

Effects
Effects on pH
Water temperatures as high as 47 °C (117 °F) have been measured underground at the Iron Mountain Mine, and the pH can be as low as −3.6.
Organisms which cause acid mine drainage can thrive in waters with pH very close to zero. Negative pH occurs when water evaporates from already acidic pools thereby increasing the concentration of hydrogen ions.
About half of the coal mine discharges in Pennsylvania have pH under 5. However, a portion of mine drainage in both the bituminous and anthracite regions of Pennsylvania is alkaline, because limestone in the overburden neutralizes acid before the drainage emanates.

Yellow boy
When the pH of acid mine drainage is raised past 3, either through contact with fresh water or neutralizing minerals, previously soluble iron(III) ions precipitate as iron(III) hydroxide, a yellow-orange solid colloquially known as yellow boy. Other types of iron precipitates are possible, including iron oxides and oxyhydroxides, and sulfates such as jarosite. All these precipitates can discolor water and smother plant and animal life on the streambed, disrupting stream ecosystems (a specific offense under the Fisheries Act in Canada). The process also produces additional hydrogen ions, which can further decrease pH.  In some cases, the concentrations of iron hydroxides in yellow boy are so high the precipitate can be recovered for commercial use in pigments.

Trace metal and semi-metal contamination
Many acid rock discharges also contain elevated levels of potentially toxic metals, especially nickel and copper with lower levels of a range of trace and semi-metal ions such as lead, arsenic, aluminium, and manganese. The elevated levels of heavy metals can only be dissolved in waters that have a low pH, as is found in the acidic waters produced by pyrite oxidation. In the coal belt around the south Wales valleys in the UK highly acidic nickel-rich discharges from coal stocking sites have proved to be particularly troublesome.

Effects on aquatic wildlife
Acid mine drainage also affects the wildlife living within the affected body of water. Aquatic macroinvertebrates living in streams or parts of streams affected by acid mine drainage show fewer individuals, less diversity, and lower biomass. Many species of fish also cannot tolerate the pollution. Among the macroinvertebrates, certain species can be found at only certain levels of pollution, while other species can be found over a wide range.

Identification and prediction
In a mining setting it is leading practice to carry out a geochemical assessment of mine materials during the early stages of a project to determine the potential for AMD. The geochemical assessment aims to map the distribution and variability of key geochemical parameters, acid generating and element leaching characteristics.
The assessment may include:

Sampling;
Static geochemical testwork (e.g. acid-base accounting, sulfur speciation);
Kinetic geochemical testwork - Conducting oxygen consumption tests, such as the OxCon, to quantify acidity generation rates
Modelling of oxidation, pollutant generation and release; and
Modelling of material composition.

Treatment
Oversight
In the United Kingdom, many discharges from abandoned mines are exempt from regulatory control. In such cases the Environment Agency and Natural Resources Wales working with partners such as the Coal Authority have provided some innovative solutions, including constructed wetland solutions such as on the River Pelenna in the valley of the River Afan near Port Talbot and the constructed wetland next to the River Neath at Ynysarwed.
Although abandoned underground mines produce most of the acid mine drainage, some recently mined and reclaimed surface mines have produced ARD and have degraded local ground-water and surface-water resources. Acidic water produced at active mines must be neutralized to achieve pH 6–9 before discharge from a mine site to a stream is permitted.
In Canada, work to reduce the effects of acid mine drainage is concentrated under the Mine Environment Neutral Drainage (MEND) program. Total liability from acid rock drainage is estimated to be between CA$2 billion and CA$5 billion.  Over a period of eight years, MEND claims to have reduced ARD liability by up to CA$400 million, from an investment of CA$17.5 million.

Methods
Neutralization with calcium carbonate
Often, limestone rocks or appropriate calcareous strata that could contribute to neutralize acid effluents are lacking, or insufficiently accessible (too short contact time with acidic waters flowing too fast, too low specific surface area, insufficient contact...), at sites affected by acidic rock drainage. In such cases, crushed limestone can be dumped on site as neutralizing agent.
However, although limestone is an unprocessed raw material available in large quantities and the least expensive neutralisation agent, it can suffer from a number of disadvantages possibly limiting its applications. Indeed, small calcium carbonate grains of crushed limestone can be prone to the formation of a coating of gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O) surrounded by a thin impermeable and protective film of less soluble Fe-Al hydroxysulfate. This coating is sometimes referred to in the literature as an armor (shield, encrustation, rim, rind...). When present, it passivates the limestone surface, preventing calcite dissolution and the further release of bicarbonate in solution.
This might explain why at Cwm Rheidol in mid Wales, the positive impact of limestone application has been much less than anticipated because of the formation of a poorly soluble calcium sulfate layer onto the surface of limestone chips, binding the material and preventing further neutralization.

Neutralization with lime
Depending on the volume and flowrate of acid effluents to be neutralised and the scale of industrial installations, a commonly but more expensive commercial process for treating acid mine drainage is precipitation with lime in a high-density sludge (HDS) process. In this application, a slurry of lime (CaO – Ca(OH)2 after hydration) is dispersed into a tank containing acid mine drainage and recycled sludge to increase water pH to about 9. At this pH, most toxic metals become insoluble and precipitate, aided by the presence of recycled sludge. Optionally, air can be injected in the tank to oxidize iron(II) and manganese(II) and assist in their precipitation. The resulting slurry is directed to a sludge-settling vessel, such as a clarifier. In that vessel, clean water will overflow for release, whereas settled metal precipitates (sludge) are recycled to the acid mine drainage treatment tank, with a sludge-wasting side stream. A number of variations of this process exist, as dictated by the chemistry of ARD, its volume, and other factors. Generally, the products of the HDS process also contain gypsum (CaSO4) and unreacted lime, which enhance both its settleability and resistance to re-acidification and metal mobilization.
A general equation for this neutralisation process is:

H2SO4 + Ca(OH)2 → CaSO4 + 2 H2O
Less complex variants of this process, such as simple lime neutralization, may involve no more than a lime silo, a mixing tank and a settling pond. These systems are far less costly to build, but are also less efficient (longer reaction times are required, and they produce a discharge with higher trace metal concentrations, if present). They would be suitable for relatively small flows or less complex acid mine drainage.

Neutralization with calcium silicate
A calcium silicate feedstock, made from processed steel slag, can also be used to neutralize active acidity in AMD systems by removing free hydrogen ions from the bulk solution, thereby increasing pH. As the silicate anion captures H+ ions (raising the pH), it forms monosilicic acid (H4SiO4), a neutral solute. Monosilicic acid remains in the bulk solution and play many roles in correcting the adverse effects of acidic conditions. In the bulk solution, the silicate anion is very effective in neutralizing H+ cations in the soil solution. While its mode-of-action is quite different from limestone, the ability of calcium silicate to neutralize acid solutions is equivalent to limestone as evidenced by its CCE value of 90–100% and its relative neutralizing value of 98%.
In the presence of heavy metals, calcium silicate reacts in a different way than limestone. As limestone raises the pH of the bulk solution, when heavy metals are present, precipitation of the poorly soluble metal hydroxides is accelerated and the tendency for an impermeable metal hydroxide coating, termed armoring, to form on limestone grains surface increases significantly. Limestone grains become coated by a rind of gypsum encapsulated itself in a thin external film of impermeable and protective Fe-Al hydroxysulfate. Armoring slows the CaCO3 dissolution and prevents the limestone grains from releasing additional alkalinity in solution. In the calcium silicate aggregates, as silicic acid species are adsorbed onto the metal hydroxide surface, the development of silica layers (mono- and bi-layers) lead to the formation of colloidal complexes with neutral or negative surface charges. These negatively charged colloids are electrostatically repelled by each other (as well as with the negatively charged calcium silicate granules). The sequestered metal colloids are stabilized and remain in a stable dispersed state – effectively interrupting metal precipitation and reducing vulnerability of the material to armoring (formation of an impervious crust around material grains preventing their dissolution and decreasing their reactivity).

Removal of toxic metals by ion exchange
Cation exchange processes have previously been investigated as a potential treatment for acid mine drainage. The principle is that an ion-exchange resin can remove potentially toxic metals (cationic resins), or chlorides, sulfates and uranyl sulfate complexes (anionic resins) from mine water. Once the contaminants are adsorbed, the exchange sites on resins must be regenerated, which typically requires acidic and basic reagents and generates a brine that contains the pollutants in a concentrated form. A South African company that won the 2013 IChemE award for water management and supply (treating AMD) has developed a patented ion-exchange process that treats mine effluents (and AMD) economically.

Constructed wetlands
Constructed wetlands systems have been proposed during the 1980s to treat acid mine drainage generated by the abandoned coal mines in Eastern Appalachia.  Generally, the wetlands receive near-neutral water, after it has been typically neutralized by a limestone-based treatment process. Metal precipitation occurs from their oxidation at near-neutral pH, complexation with organic matter, precipitation as carbonates or sulfides. The latter results from sediment-borne anaerobic bacteria capable of reducing sulfate ions into sulfide ions. These sulfide ions can then bind with heavy metal ions, precipitating heavy metals out of solution and effectively reversing the entire process.
The attractiveness of a constructed wetlands solution lies in its relative low cost. They are limited by the metal loads they can deal with (either from high flows or metal concentrations), though current practitioners have succeeded in developing constructed wetlands that treat high volumes (see description of Campbell Mine constructed wetland) and/or highly acidic water (with adequate pre-treatment). Typically, the effluent from constructed wetland receiving near-neutral water will be well-buffered at 6.5–7.0 and can readily be discharged. Some of metal precipitates retained in sediments are easily oxidised and remobilised when exposed to atmospheric oxygen (e.g., copper sulfide or elemental selenium), and it is very important that the wetland sediments remain largely and permanently submerged to maintain them insoluble and immobile. Prolonged droughts caused by climate warming might compromise the proper functioning and the safety of some constructed wetlands if during extremely hot summer period water supply decreases and evaporation accelerates causing them to dry up.
An example of an effective constructed wetland is on the Afon Pelena in the River Afan valley above Port Talbot where highly ferruginous discharges from the Whitworth mine have been successfully treated.

Precipitation of metal sulfides
Most base metals in acidic solution precipitate in contact with free sulfide, e.g. from H2S or NaHS. Solid-liquid separation after reaction would produce a base metal-free effluent that can be discharged or further treated to reduce sulfate, and a metal sulfide concentrate with possible economic value.
As an alternative, several researchers have investigated the precipitation of metals using biogenic sulfide. In this process, sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) oxidize organic matter using sulfate as terminal electron acceptor, instead of oxygen. Their metabolic products include bicarbonate produced by organic matter oxidation, which can neutralize water acidity, and hydrogen sulfide, which forms highly insoluble precipitates with many toxic metals. Although promising, this process has been slow in being adopted for a variety of technical reasons.

Technologies
Many technologies exist for the treatment of AMD.

Metagenomic study
With the advance of large-scale sequencing strategies, genomes of microorganisms in the acid mine drainage community are directly sequenced from the environment. The nearly full genomic constructs allows new understanding of the community and able to reconstruct their metabolic pathways. Our knowledge of acidophiles in acid mine drainage remains rudimentary: we know of many more species associated with ARD than we can establish roles and functions.

Microbes and drug discovery
Scientists have recently begun to explore acid mine drainage and mine reclamation sites for unique soil bacteria capable of producing new pharmaceutical leads. Soil microbes have long been a source for effective drugs and new research, such as that conducted at the Center for Pharmaceutical Research and Innovation, suggests these extreme environments to be an untapped source for new discovery.

List of selected acid mine drainage sites worldwide
This list includes both mines producing acid mine drainage and river systems significantly affected by such drainage. It is by no means complete, as worldwide, several thousands of such sites exist.

Africa
West Rand Goldfield, Witwatersrand, South Africa

Europe
Avoca, County Wicklow, Ireland
Aznalcollar mine on the Guadiamar, Spain
Wheal Jane, Cornwall, England
Tinto River, Spain
Odiel River, Spain
Libiola's mine, Italy
Spree River, Germany
The Lusatian Lake District and the Central German Lake District, both the product of open pit lignite mining, have to deal with acid mine drainage

North America
Argo Tunnel, Idaho Springs, Colorado, US
Berkeley Pit superfund site, covering the Clark Fork River and 50,000 acres (200 km2) in and around Butte, Montana, US
The Summitville Mine in Rio Grande County, Colorado. The area has both natural and mining-exacerbated acid drainage flowing into the Wrightman Fork, then into the Alamosa River, which flows into the San Luis Valley
Britannia Beach, British Columbia, Canada
Clinch-Powell River system, Virginia and Tennessee, US
Iron Mountain Mine, Shasta County, California, United States
Monday Creek, Ohio, US
The Irwin Syncline in Southwestern Pennsylvania
Pronto mine tailings site, Elliot Lake area, Ontario, Canada
North Fork of Kentucky River, Kentucky, US
Old Forge borehole, Lackawanna River, Pennsylvania. Discharges 40–100 million gallons of acid mine drainage per day.
Cheat River Watershed Archived 18 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine, West Virginia, US
Copperas Brook Watershed, from the Elizabeth Mine in S. Strafford, Vermont, impacting the Ompompanoosuc River
Davis Pyrite Mine in NW Massachusetts
Hughes bore hole, Pennsylvania
Gold King Mine, Colorado, US

Oceania
Brukunga, South Australia
Grasberg mine, Papua province, Indonesia
McArthur River zinc mine, Northern Territory, Australia
Mount Morgan Mine, Queensland, Australia
Ok Tedi environmental disaster caused by Ok Tedi Mine, Ok Tedi River, Papua New Guinea
Tui mine, an abandoned mine on the western slopes of Mount Te Aroha in the Kaimai Range of New Zealand, considered to be the most contaminated site in the country
West Coast mineral fields, Tasmania, Australia

See also
Bioleaching
Environmental issues with mining
International Mine Water Association
Passive treatment system
Uranium acid mine drainage
Environmental impact of iron ore mining

References
External links

Managing Acid and Metalliferous Drainage: Leading Practice Sustainable Development Program for the Mining Industry Trove: Australian Government Dept. of Industry, Tourism and Resources handbook, 2007. ISBN 0642725128 Accessed 21 May 2016.
AMRClearinghouse.org
OrangeWaterNetwork.org (EPCAMR's Website)
Assessment of treatment methods (PDF)
IMWA – International Mine Water Association
INAP – International Network of Acid Prevention
INAP – Global Acid Rock Drainage Guide
Overview of chemical processes involved
PADRE – Partnership for Acid Drainage Remediation in Europe
The Science of Acid Mine Drainage and Passive Treatment
USGS Mine Drainage
World's Most Acidic Waters are Found Near Redding, California (pH -3.6)
MiWER - Mine Water and Environment Research Centre (based in Australia)
Overview of acid mine drainage impacts in the West Rand Goldfield

================================================================================

# Activated sludge

The activated sludge process is a type of biological wastewater treatment process for treating sewage or industrial wastewaters using aeration and a biological floc composed of bacteria and protozoa. It is one of several biological wastewater treatment alternatives in secondary treatment, which deals with the removal of biodegradable organic matter and suspended solids. It uses air (or oxygen) and microorganisms to biologically oxidize organic pollutants, producing a waste sludge (or floc) containing the oxidized material.
The activated sludge process for removing carbonaceous pollution begins with an aeration tank where air (or oxygen) is injected into the waste water. This is followed by a settling tank to allow the biological flocs (the sludge blanket) to settle, thus separating the biological sludge from the clear treated water. Part of the waste sludge is recycled to the aeration tank and the remaining waste sludge is removed for further treatment and ultimate disposal.
Plant types include package plants, oxidation ditch, deep shaft/vertical treatment, surface-aerated basins, and sequencing batch reactors (SBRs). Aeration methods include diffused aeration, surface aerators (cones) or, rarely, pure oxygen aeration.
Sludge bulking can occur which makes activated sludge difficult to settle and frequently has an adverse impact on final effluent quality. Treating sludge bulking and managing the plant to avoid a recurrence requires skilled management and may require full-time staffing of a works to allow immediate intervention. A new development of the activated sludge process is the Nereda process which produces a granular sludge that settles very well.

Purpose
The activated sludge process is a biological process used to oxidise carbonaceous biological matter, oxidising nitrogenous matter (mainly ammonium and nitrogen) in biological matter, and removing nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus).

Process description
The process takes advantage of aerobic micro-organisms that can digest organic matter in sewage, and clump together by flocculation entrapping fine particulate matter as they do so. It thereby produces a liquid that is relatively free from suspended solids and organic material, and flocculated particles that will readily settle out and can be removed.
The general arrangement of an activated sludge process for removing carbonaceous pollution includes the following items:

Aeration tank where air (or oxygen) is injected in the mixed liquor.
Settling tank (usually referred to as "final clarifier" or "secondary settling tank") to allow the biological flocs (the sludge blanket) to settle, thus separating the biological sludge from the clear treated water.
Treatment of nitrogenous or phosphorous matter comprises the addition of an anoxic compartment inside the aeration tank in order to perform the nitrification-denitrification process more efficiently. First, ammonia is oxidized to nitrite, which is then converted into nitrate in aerobic conditions (aeration compartment). Facultative bacteria then reduce the nitrate to nitrogen gas in anoxic conditions (anoxic compartment). Moreover, the organisms used for the phosphorus uptake (Polyphosphate Accumulating Organisms) are more efficient under anoxic conditions. These microorganisms accumulate large amounts of phosphates in their cells and are settled in the secondary clarifier. The settled sludge is either disposed of as waste activated sludge or reused in the aeration tank as return activated sludge. Some sludge must always be returned to the aeration tanks to maintain an adequate population of organisms.
The yield of PAOs (Polyphosphate Accumulating Organisms) is reduced between 70 and 80% under aerobic conditions. Even though the phosphorus can be removed upstream of the aeration tank by chemical precipitation (adding metal ions such as: calcium, aluminum or iron), the biological phosphorus removal is more economic due to the saving of chemicals.

Bioreactor and final clarifier
The process involves air or oxygen being introduced into a mixture of screened, and primary treated sewage or industrial wastewater (wastewater) combined with organisms to develop a biological floc which reduces the organic content of the sewage. This material, which in healthy sludge is a brown floc, is largely composed of Saprotrophic bacteria but also has an important protozoan flora component mainly composed of amoebae, Spirotrichs, Peritrichs including Vorticellids and a range of other filter-feeding species. Other important constituents include motile and sedentary Rotifers. In poorly managed activated sludge, a range of mucilaginous filamentous bacteria can develop - including Sphaerotilus natans, Gordonia, and other microorganisms -  which produces a sludge that is difficult to settle and can result in the sludge blanket decanting over the weirs in the settlement tank to severely contaminate the final effluent quality. This material is often described as sewage fungus but true fungal communities are relatively uncommon.
The combination of wastewater and biological mass is commonly known as mixed liquor. In all activated sludge plants, once the wastewater has received sufficient treatment, excess mixed liquor is discharged into settling tanks and the treated supernatant is run off to undergo further treatment before discharge. Part of the settled material, the sludge, is returned to the head of the aeration system to re-seed the new wastewater entering the tank. This fraction of the floc is called return activated sludge (R.A.S.).
The space required for a sewage treatment plant can be reduced by using a membrane bioreactor to remove some wastewater from the mixed liquor prior to treatment. This results in a more concentrated waste product that can then be treated using the activated sludge process.
Many sewage treatment plants use axial flow pumps to transfer nitrified mixed liquor from the aeration zone to the anoxic zone for denitrification.  These pumps are often referred to as internal mixed liquor recycle pumps (IMLR pumps). The raw sewage, the RAS, and the nitrified mixed liquor are mixed by submersible mixers in the anoxic zones in order to achieve denitrification.

Sludge production
Activated sludge is also the name given to the active biological material produced by activated sludge plants. Excess sludge is called "surplus activated sludge" or "waste activated sludge" and is removed from the treatment process to keep "food to biomass" (F/M) ratio in balance (where biomass refers to the activated sludge). This sewage sludge is usually mixed with primary sludge from the primary clarifiers and undergoes further sludge treatment for example by anaerobic digestion, followed by thickening, dewatering, composting and land application.
The amount of sewage sludge produced from the activated sludge process is directly proportional to the amount of wastewater treated. The total sludge production consists of the sum of primary sludge from the primary sedimentation tanks as well as waste activated sludge from the bioreactors. The activated sludge process produces about 70–100 grams per cubic metre (1.9–2.7 oz/cu yd) of waste activated sludge (that is grams of dry solids produced per cubic metre of wastewater treated). 80 grams per cubic metre (2.2 oz/cu yd) is regarded as being typical. In addition, about 110–170 grams per cubic metre (3.0–4.6 oz/cu yd) of primary sludge is produced in the primary sedimentation tanks which most - but not all - of the activated sludge process configurations use.

Process control
The general process control method is to monitor sludge blanket level, SVI (Sludge Volume Index), MCRT (Mean Cell Residence Time), F/M (Food to Microorganism), as well as the biota of the activated sludge and the major nutrients DO (Dissolved oxygen), nitrogen, phosphate, BOD (Biochemical oxygen demand), and COD (Chemical oxygen demand). In the reactor/aerator and clarifier system, the sludge blanket is measured from the bottom of the clarifier to the level of settled solids in the clarifier's water column; this, in large plants, can be done up to three times a day.
The SVI is the volume of settled sludge occupied by a given mass of dry sludge solids. It is calculated by dividing the volume of settled sludge in a mixed liquor sample, measured in milliliters per liter of sample (after 30 minutes of settling), by the MLSS (Mixed Liquor Suspended Solids), measured in grams per liter. The MCRT is the total mass (in kilograms or pounds) of mixed liquor suspended solids in the aerator and clarifier divided by the mass flow rate (in kilograms/pounds per day) of mixed liquor suspended solids leaving as WAS and final effluent. The F/M is the ratio of food fed to the microorganisms each day to the mass of microorganisms held under aeration. Specifically, it is the amount of BOD fed to the aerator (in kilograms/pounds per day) divided by the amount (in kilograms or pounds) of Mixed Liquor Volatile Suspended Solids (MLVSS) under aeration. Note:  Some references use MLSS (Mixed Liquor Suspended Solids) for expedience, but MLVSS is considered more accurate for the measure of microorganisms. Again, due to expedience, COD is generally used, in lieu of BOD, as BOD takes five days for results.
To ensure good bacterial settlement and to avoid sedimentation problems caused by filamentous bacteria, plants using atmospheric air as an oxygen source should maintain a dissolved oxygen (DO) level of about 2 mg/L in the aeration tank. In pure oxygen systems, DO levels are usually in the range of 4 to 10 mg/L. Operators should monitor the tank for low DO bacteria, such as S. natans, type 1701 and H. hydrossis, which indicate low DO conditions by elevated effluent turbidity and dark activated sludge with foul odours. Many plants have on-line monitoring equipment that continuously measures and records DO levels at specific points within the aeration tank. These on-line analysers send data to the SCADA system and allow automatic control of the aeration system to maintain a predetermined DO level. Whether generated automatically or taken manually, regular monitoring is necessary to favour organisms that settle well rather than filaments. However, operating the aeration system involves finding a balance between sufficient oxygen for proper treatment and the energy cost, which represents approximately 90% of the total treatment cost.
Based on these control methods, the amount of settled solids in the mixed liquor can be varied by wasting activated sludge (WAS) or returning activated sludge (RAS).
The returning activated sludge is designed to recycle a portion of the activated sludge from the secondary clarifier back to the aeration tank. It usually includes a pump that draws the portion back. 
The RAS line is designed considering the potential for clogging, settling, and other relatable issues that manage to impact the flow of the activated sludge back to the aeration tank. This line must handle the required flow of the plant and has to be designed to minimize the risk of solids settling or accumulating.

Nitrification and Denitrification
Ammonium can have a toxic effect on aquatic organism. Nitrification also takes place in bodies of water, which leads to oxygen depletion. Furthermore, nitrate and ammonium are eutrophying (fertilizing) nutrients that can impair water bodies. For these reasons, nitrification and, in many cases, nitrogen removal is necessary.
Two special steps are required for nitrogen removal:
a) Nitrification: Oxidation of ammonium nitrogen and organically bound nitrogen to nitrate. Nitrification is very sensitive to inhibitors and can lead to a pH value in poorly buffered water.
Nitrification takes places in following steps:

          N

            H

              4

              +

          +
          1.5

            O

              2

          ⟶

          N

            O

              2

              −

          +
          2

            H

              +

          +

            H

              2

          O
          +
          E
          n
          e
          r
          g
          y

    {\displaystyle \mathrm {\ NH_{4}^{+}+1.5\ O_{2}\longrightarrow \ NO_{2}^{-}+2H^{+}+H_{2}O+Energy} }

          N

            O

              2

              −

          +
          0.5

            O

              2

          ⟶

          N

            O

              3

              −

          +
          E
          n
          e
          r
          g
          y

    {\displaystyle \mathrm {\ NO_{2}^{-}+0.5\ O_{2}\longrightarrow \ NO_{3}^{-}+Energy} }

this results in:

          N

            H

              4

              +

          +
          2

            O

              2

          ⟶

          N

            O

              3

              −

          +
          2

            H

              +

          +

            H

              2

          O
          +
          E
          n
          e
          r
          g
          y

    {\displaystyle \mathrm {\ NH_{4}^{+}+2\ O_{2}\longrightarrow \ NO_{3}^{-}+2H^{+}+H_{2}O+Energy} }

Nitrification is associated with the production of acid (H+). This puts a strain on the buffering capacity of the water or a pH value shift may occur, which impairs the process.
b) Denitrification: Reduction of nitrate nitrogen to molecular nitrogen, which escapes from the wastewater into the atmosphere. This step can be carried out by microorganisms commonly found in sewage treatment plants. However, these only use the nitrate as an electron acceptor if no dissolved oxygen is present.

          2

          N

            O

              3

              −

          +
          2

            H

              +

          +
          10

          H
          ⟶

            N

              2

          +
          6

            H

              2

          O

    {\displaystyle \mathrm {\ 2\ NO_{3}^{-}+2\ H^{+}+10\ H\longrightarrow \ N_{2}+6\ H_{2}O} }

In order for denitrification to take place in the activated sludge process, an electron source, a reductant, must therefore also be present that can reduce sufficient nitrate to N2. If there is too little substrate in the raw wastewater, this can be added artificially. In addition, denitrification corrects the change in H+ concentration (pH value shift) that occurs during nitrification. This is particularly important for poorly buffered water.
Nitrification and denitrification are in considerable contradiction with regard to the required environmental conditions. Nitrification requires oxygen and CO2. Denitrification only takes place in the absence of dissolved oxygen and with a sufficient supply of oxidizable substances.

Plant types
There are a variety of types of activated sludge plants. These include:

Package plants
There are a wide range of types of package plants, often serving small communities or industrial plants that may use hybrid treatment processes often involving the use of aerobic sludge to treat the incoming sewage. In such plants the primary settlement stage of treatment may be omitted. In these plants, a biotic floc is created which provides the required substrate.  Package plants are designed and fabricated by specialty engineering firms in dimensions that allow for their transportation to the job site in public highways, typically width and height of 3.7 by 3.7 metres (12 ft × 12 ft).  Length varies with capacity with larger plants being fabricated in pieces and welded on site. Steel is preferred over synthetic materials (e.g., plastic) for its durability. Package plants are commonly variants of extended aeration, to promote the "fit and forget" approach required for small communities without dedicated operational staff. There are various standards to assist with their design.
To use less space, treat difficult waste, and intermittent flows, a number of designs of hybrid treatment plants have been produced. Such plants often combine at least two stages of the three main treatment stages into one combined stage. In the UK, where a large number of wastewater treatment plants serve small populations, package plants are a viable alternative to building a large structure for each process stage. In the US, package plants are typically used in rural areas, highway rest stops and trailer parks.
Package plants may be referred to as high charged or low charged. This refers to the way the biological load is processed. In high charged systems, the biological stage is presented with a high organic load and the combined floc and organic material is then oxygenated for a few hours before being charged again with a new load. In the low charged system the biological stage contains a low organic load and is combined with flocculate for longer times.

Oxidation ditch
In some areas, where more land is available, sewage is treated in large round or oval ditches with one or more horizontal aerators typically called brush or disc aerators which drive the mixed liquor around the ditch and provide aeration. These are oxidation ditches, often referred to by manufacturer's trade names such as Pasveer, Orbal, or Carrousel. They have the advantage that they are relatively easy to maintain and are resilient to shock loads that often occur in smaller communities (i.e. at breakfast time and in the evening).
Oxidation ditches are installed commonly as 'fit & forget' technology, with typical design parameters of a hydraulic retention time of 24 – 48 hours, and a sludge age of 12 – 20 days. This compares with nitrifying activated sludge plants having a retention time of 8 hours, and a sludge age of 8 – 12 days.

Deep shaft / Vertical treatment
Where land is in short supply sewage may be treated by injection of oxygen into a pressured return sludge stream which is injected into the base of a deep columnar tank buried in the ground. Such shafts may be up to 100 metres (330 ft) deep and are filled with sewage liquor. As the sewage rises the oxygen forced into solution by the pressure at the base of the shaft breaks out as molecular oxygen providing a highly efficient source of oxygen for the activated sludge biota. The rising oxygen and injected return sludge provide the physical mechanism for mixing of the sewage and sludge. Mixed sludge and sewage is decanted at the surface and separated into supernatant and sludge components. The efficiency of deep shaft treatment can be high.
Surface aerators are commonly quoted as having an aeration efficiency of 0.5–1.5 kg O2/kWh (1.1–3.3 lb O2/kWh), diffused aeration as 1.5–2.5 kg O2/kWh (3.3–5.5 lb O2/kWh). Deep Shaft claims 5–8 kg O2/kWh (11–18 lb O2/kWh).
However, the costs of construction are high. Deep Shaft has seen the greatest uptake in Japan, because of the land area issues. Deep Shaft was developed by ICI, as a spin-off from their Pruteen process. In the UK it is found at three sites: Tilbury, Anglian water, treating a wastewater with a high industrial contribution; Southport, United Utilities, because of land space issues; and Billingham, ICI, again treating industrial effluent, and built (after the Tilbury shafts) by ICI to help the agent sell more.
DeepShaft is a patented, licensed, process. The licensee has changed several times and currently (2015) Noram Engineering sells it.

Surface-aerated basins
Most biological oxidation processes for treating industrial wastewaters have in common the use of oxygen (or air) and microbial action. Surface-aerated basins achieve 80 to 90% removal of BOD with retention times of 1 to 10 days. The basins may range in depth from 1.5 to 5.0 metres (4.9 to 16.4 ft) and utilize motor-driven aerators floating on the surface of the wastewater.
In an aerated basin system, the aerators provide two functions: they transfer air into the basins required by the biological oxidation reactions, and they provide the mixing required for dispersing the air and for contacting the reactants (that is, oxygen, wastewater and microbes). Typically, the floating surface aerators are rated to deliver the amount of air equivalent to 1.8 to 2.7 kilograms O2/kWh (4.0 to 6.0 lb O2/kWh). However, they do not provide as good mixing as is normally achieved in activated sludge systems and therefore aerated basins do not achieve the same performance level as activated sludge units.
Biological oxidation processes are sensitive to temperature and, between 0 and 40 °C (32 and 104 °F), the rate of biological reactions increase with temperature. Most surface aerated vessels operate at between 4 and 32 °C (39 and 90 °F).

Sequencing batch reactors (SBRs)
Sequencing batch reactors (SBRs) treat wastewater in batches within the same vessel. This means that the bioreactor and final clarifier are not separated in space but in a timed sequence. The installation consists of at least two identically equipped tanks with a common inlet, which can be alternated between them. While one tank is in settle/decant mode the other is aerating and filling.

Aeration methods
Diffused aeration
Sewage liquor is run into deep tanks with diffuser grid aeration systems that are attached to the floor. These are like the diffused airstone used in tropical fish tanks but on a much larger scale. Air is pumped through the blocks and the curtain of bubbles formed both oxygenates the liquor and also provides the necessary mixing action. Where capacity is limited or the sewage is unusually strong or difficult to treat, oxygen may be used instead of air. Typically, the air is generated by some type of air blower.

Surface aerators (cones)
Vertically mounted tubes of up to 1-metre (3.3 ft) diameter extending from just above the base of a deep concrete tank to just below the surface of the sewage liquor. A typical shaft might be 10 metres (33 ft) high. At the surface end, the tube is formed into a cone with helical vanes attached to the inner surface. When the tube is rotated, the vanes spin liquor up and out of the cones drawing new sewage liquor from the base of the tank. In many works, each cone is located in a separate cell that can be isolated from the remaining cells if required for maintenance. Some works may have two cones to a cell and some large works may have 4 cones per cell.

Pure oxygen aeration
Pure oxygen activated sludge aeration systems are sealed-tank reactor vessels with surface aerator type impellers mounted within the tanks at the oxygen carbon liquor surface interface. The amount of oxygen entrainment, or DO (Dissolved Oxygen), can be controlled by a weir adjusted level control, and a vent gas oxygen controlled oxygen feed valve. Oxygen is generated on site by cryogenic distillation of air, pressure swing adsorption, or other methods. These systems are used where wastewater plant space is at a premium and high sewage throughput is required as high energy costs are involved in purifying oxygen.

Recent developments
A new development of the activated sludge process is the Nereda process which produces a granular sludge that settles very well (the sludge volume index is reduced from 200–300 to 40 millilitres per gram (192–288 to 38 US fl oz/oz)). A new process reactor system is created to take advantage of this quick settling sludge and is integrated into the aeration tank instead of having a separate unit outside. As of 2015, about 30 Nereda wastewater treatment plants worldwide were operational, under construction or under design, varying in size from 5,000 up to 858,000 person equivalent.

Issues
Process upsets
Sludge bulking can occur which makes activated sludge difficult to settle and frequently has an adverse impact on final effluent quality. Treating sludge bulking and managing the plant to avoid a recurrence requires skilled management and may require full-time staffing of a works to allow immediate intervention.
The discharge of toxic industrial pollution to treatment plants designed primarily to treat domestic sewage can create process upsets.

Costs and technology choice
The activated sludge process is an example for a more high-tech, energy intensive or "mechanized" process that is relatively expensive compared to some other wastewater treatment systems. It can provide a very high level of treatment.
Activated sludge plants are wholly dependent on an electrical supply to power the aerators to transfer settled solids back to the aeration tank inlet, and in many cases to pump waste sludge and  final effluent. In some works untreated sewage is lifted by pumps to the head-works to provide sufficient fall through the works to enable a satisfactory discharge head for the final effluent.  Alternative technologies such as trickling filter treatment requires much less power and can operate on gravity alone.

History
The activated sludge process was discovered in 1913 in the United Kingdom by two engineers, Edward Ardern and W.T. Lockett, who were conducting research for the Manchester Corporation Rivers Department at Davyhulme Sewage Works. In 1912, Gilbert Fowler, a scientist at the University of Manchester, observed experiments being conducted at the Lawrence Experiment Station at Massachusetts involving the aeration of sewage in a bottle that had been coated with algae. Fowler's engineering colleagues, Ardern and Lockett, experimented on treating sewage in a draw-and-fill reactor, which produced a highly treated effluent. They aerated the waste-water continuously for about a month and were able to achieve a complete nitrification of the sample material. Believing that the sludge had been activated (in a similar manner to activated carbon) the process was named activated sludge. Not until much later was it realized that what had actually occurred was a means to concentrate biological organisms, decoupling the liquid retention time (ideally, low, for a compact treatment system) from the solids retention time (ideally, fairly high, for an effluent low in BOD5 and ammonia.)
Their results were published in their seminal 1914 paper, and the first full-scale continuous-flow system was installed at Worcester two years later. In the aftermath of the First World War the new treatment method spread rapidly, especially to the US, Denmark, Germany and Canada. By the late 1930s, the activated sludge treatment became a well-known biological wastewater treatment process in those countries where sewer systems and sewage treatment plants were common.

See also
Activated sludge model
Aerated lagoon
Aerobic granulation
Aerobic granular reactor
Aerobic treatment system
Industrial wastewater treatment
List of wastewater treatment technologies
Membrane bioreactor
Rotating biological contactor
Sludge bulking
Thermal hydrolysis

== References ==

================================================================================

# Thermocline

A thermocline (also known as the thermal layer or the metalimnion in lakes) is
a distinct layer based on temperature within a large body of fluid (e.g. water, as in an ocean or lake; or air, e.g. an atmosphere) with a high gradient of distinct temperature differences associated with depth. In the ocean, the thermocline divides the upper mixed layer from the calm deep water below.
Depending largely on season, latitude, and turbulent mixing by wind, thermoclines may be a semi-permanent feature of the body of water in which they occur, or they may form temporarily in response to phenomena such as the radiative heating/cooling of surface water during the day/night. Factors that affect the depth and thickness of a thermocline include seasonal weather variations, latitude, and local environmental conditions, such as tides and currents.

Oceans
Most of the heat energy of the sunlight that strikes the Earth is absorbed in the first few centimeters at the ocean's surface, which heats during the day and cools at night as heat energy is lost to space by radiation. Waves mix the water near the surface layer and distribute heat to deeper water such that the temperature may be relatively uniform in the upper 100 metres (330 ft), depending on wave strength and the existence of surface turbulence caused by currents. Below this mixed layer, the temperature remains relatively stable over day/night cycles. The temperature of the deep ocean drops gradually with depth. As saline water does not freeze until it reaches −2.3 °C (27.9 °F) (colder as depth and pressure increase) the temperature well below the surface is usually not far from zero degrees.
The thermocline varies in depth. It is semi-permanent in the tropics, variable in temperate regions and shallow to nonexistent in the polar regions, where the water column is cold from the surface to the bottom. A layer of sea ice will act as an insulation blanket. The first accurate global measurements were made during the oceanographic expedition of HMS Challenger.
In the open ocean, the thermocline is characterized by a negative sound speed gradient, making the thermocline important in submarine warfare because it can reflect active sonar and other acoustic signals. This stems from a discontinuity in the acoustic impedance of water created by the sudden change in density.
In scuba diving, a thermocline where water drops in temperature by a few degrees Celsius quite suddenly can sometimes be observed between two bodies of water, for example where colder upwelling water runs into a surface layer of warmer water. It gives the water an appearance of wrinkled glass, the kind often used in bathroom windows to obscure the view, and is caused by the altered refractive index of the cold or warm water column. These same schlieren can be observed when hot air rises off the tarmac at airports or desert roads and is the cause of mirages.

Thermocline seasonality
The thermocline in the ocean can vary in depth and strength seasonally. This is particularly noticeable in mid-latitudes with a thicker mixed layer in the winter and thinner mixed layer in summer. The cooler winter temperatures cause the thermocline to drop to further depths and warmed summer temperatures bring the thermocline back to the upper layer. In areas around the tropics and subtropics, the thermocline may become even thinner in the summer than in other locations. At higher latitudes, around the poles, there is more of a seasonal thermocline than a permanent one with warmer surface waters. This is where there is a dichothermal layer instead.
In the Northern hemisphere, the maximum temperatures at the surface occur through August and September and minimum temperatures occur through February and March with total heat content being lowest in March. This is when the seasonal thermocline starts to build back up after being broken down through the colder months.
A permanent thermocline is one that is not affected by season and lies below the yearly mixed layer maximum depth.

Other water bodies
Thermoclines can also be observed in lakes. In colder climates, this leads to a phenomenon called stratification. During the summer, warm water, which is less dense, will sit on top of colder, denser, deeper water with a thermocline separating them. The warm layer is called the epilimnion and the cold layer is called the hypolimnion. Because the warm water is exposed to the sun during the day, a stable system exists and very little mixing of warm water and cold water occurs, particularly in calm weather.

One result of this stability is that as the summer wears on, there is less and less oxygen below the thermocline as the water below the thermocline never circulates to the surface and organisms in the water deplete the available oxygen. As winter approaches, the temperature of the surface water will drop as nighttime cooling dominates heat transfer. A point is reached where the density of the cooling surface water becomes greater than the density of the deep water and overturning begins as the dense surface water moves down under the influence of gravity. This process is aided by wind or any other process (currents for example) that agitates the water. This effect also occurs in Arctic and Antarctic waters, bringing water to the surface which, although low in oxygen, is higher in nutrients than the original surface water. This enriching of surface nutrients may produce blooms of phytoplankton, making these areas productive.
As the temperature continues to drop, the water on the surface may get cold enough to freeze and the lake/ocean begins to ice over. A new thermocline develops where the densest water (4 °C (39 °F)) sinks to the bottom, and the less dense water (water that is approaching the freezing point) rises to the top.  Once this new stratification establishes itself, it lasts until the water warms enough for the 'spring turnover,' which occurs after the ice melts and the surface water temperature rises to 4 °C. During this transition, a thermal bar may develop.
Waves can occur on the thermocline, causing the depth of the thermocline as measured at a single location to oscillate (usually as a form of seiche). Alternately, the waves may be induced by flow over a raised bottom, producing a thermocline wave which does not change with time, but varies in depth as one moves into or against the flow.

Atmosphere
The thermal boundary between the troposphere (lower atmosphere) and the stratosphere (upper atmosphere) is a thermocline. Temperature generally decreases with altitude, but the heat from the day's exposure to sun is released at night, which can create a warm region at ground with colder air above. This is known as an inversion (a further example of a thermocline). At sunrise, the sun's energy warms the ground, causing the warming air to rise, thus destabilizing and eventually reversing the inversion layer.  
This phenomenon was first applied to the field of noise pollution study in the 1960s, contributing to the design of urban highways and noise barriers.

See also
Bathythermograph – Device to detect water temperature and pressure
Thermohaline circulation – Part of large-scale ocean circulation
Artificial upwelling – Oceanographic phenomenon of wind-driven motion of ocean water
Buoyancy – Upward force that opposes the weight of an object immersed in fluid
SOFAR channel, also known as Deep sound channel – Horizontal layer of water in the ocean at which depth the speed of sound is at its minimum
Lake stratification – Separation of water in a lake into distinct layers
Noise barrier – Exterior structure on infrastructure used to prevent loud sounds from escaping
Southern Oscillation – Climate phenomenonPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Thin layers (oceanography)

== References ==

================================================================================

# Ocean acidification

Ocean acidification is the ongoing decrease in the pH of the Earth's ocean. Between 1950 and 2020, the average pH of the ocean surface fell from approximately 8.15 to 8.05. Carbon dioxide emissions from human activities are the primary cause of ocean acidification, with atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels exceeding 422 ppm (as of 2024).  CO2 from the atmosphere is absorbed by the oceans. This chemical reaction produces carbonic acid (H2CO3) which dissociates into a bicarbonate ion (HCO−3) and a hydrogen ion (H+). The presence of free hydrogen ions (H+) lowers the pH of the ocean, increasing acidity (this does not mean that seawater is acidic yet; it is still alkaline, with a pH higher than 8). Marine calcifying organisms, such as mollusks and corals, are especially vulnerable because they rely on calcium carbonate to build shells and skeletons.
A change in pH by 0.1 represents a 26% increase in hydrogen ion concentration in the world's oceans (the pH scale is logarithmic, so a change of one in pH units is equivalent to a tenfold change in hydrogen ion concentration). Sea-surface pH and carbonate saturation states vary depending on ocean depth and location. Colder and higher latitude waters are capable of absorbing more CO2. This can cause acidity to rise, lowering the pH and carbonate saturation levels in these areas. There are several other factors that influence the atmosphere-ocean CO2 exchange, and thus local ocean acidification. These include ocean currents and upwelling zones, proximity to large continental rivers, sea ice coverage, and atmospheric exchange with nitrogen and sulfur from fossil fuel burning and agriculture.
A lower ocean pH has a range of potentially harmful effects for marine organisms. Scientists have observed for example reduced calcification, lowered immune responses, and reduced energy for basic functions such as reproduction. Ocean acidification can impact marine ecosystems that provide food and livelihoods for many people. About one billion people are wholly or partially dependent on the fishing, tourism, and coastal management services provided by coral reefs. Ongoing acidification of the oceans may therefore threaten food chains linked with the oceans.
One of the only solutions that would address the root cause of ocean acidification is reducing carbon dioxide emissions. This is one of the main objectives of climate change mitigation measures. The removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere would also help to reverse ocean acidification. In addition, there are some specific ocean-based mitigation methods, for example ocean alkalinity enhancement and enhanced weathering. These strategies are under investigation, but generally have a low technology readiness level and many risks.
Ocean acidification has happened before in Earth's geologic history. The resulting ecological collapse in the oceans had long-lasting effects on the global carbon cycle and climate.

Cause
In 2021, atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels of around 415 ppm were around 50% higher than preindustrial concentrations. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in 2023, atmospheric CO2 levels have risen from approximately 280 parts per million (ppm) in the pre-industrial era to over 410 ppm today, primarily due to human activities such as fossil fuel combustion and deforestation. The current elevated levels and rapid growth rates are unprecedented in the past 55 million years of the geological record. The sources of this excess CO2 are clearly established as human driven: they include anthropogenic fossil fuel, industrial, and land-use/land-change emissions. One source of this is fossil fuels, which are burned for energy. When burned, CO2 is released into the atmosphere as a byproduct of combustion, which is a significant contributor to the increasing levels of CO2 in the Earth's atmosphere. The ocean acts as a carbon sink for anthropogenic CO2 and takes up roughly a quarter of total anthropogenic CO2 emissions. However, the additional CO2 in the ocean results in a wholesale shift in seawater acid-base chemistry toward more acidic, lower pH conditions and lower saturation states for carbonate minerals used in many marine organism shells and skeletons.
Accumulated since 1850, the ocean sink holds up to 175±35 gigatons of carbon, with more than two-thirds of this amount (120 Gt C) being taken up by the global ocean since 1960. Over the historical period, the ocean sink increased in pace with the exponential anthropogenic emissions increase. From 1850 until 2022, the ocean has absorbed 26% of total anthropogenic emissions. Emissions during the period 1850–2021 amounted to 670±65 gigatons of carbon and were partitioned among the atmosphere (41%), ocean (26%), and land (31%).
The carbon cycle describes the fluxes of carbon dioxide (CO2) between the oceans, terrestrial biosphere, lithosphere, and atmosphere. The carbon cycle involves both organic compounds such as cellulose and inorganic carbon compounds such as carbon dioxide, carbonate ion, and bicarbonate ion, together referenced as dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC). These inorganic compounds are particularly significant in ocean acidification, as they include many forms of dissolved CO2 present in the Earth's oceans.
When CO2 dissolves, it reacts with water to form a balance of ionic and non-ionic chemical species: dissolved free carbon dioxide (CO2(aq)), carbonic acid (H2CO3), bicarbonate (HCO−3) and carbonate (CO2−3). The ratio of these species depends on factors such as seawater temperature, pressure and salinity (as shown in a Bjerrum plot). These different forms of dissolved inorganic carbon are transferred from an ocean's surface to its interior by the ocean's solubility pump. The resistance of an area of ocean to absorbing atmospheric CO2 is known as the Revelle factor.

Main effects
The ocean's chemistry is changing due to the uptake of anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2). Ocean pH, carbonate ion concentrations ([CO32−]), and calcium carbonate mineral saturation states (Ω) have been declining as a result of the uptake of approximately 30% of the anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions over the past 270 years (since around 1750). This process, commonly referred to as "ocean acidification", is making it harder for marine calcifiers to build a shell or skeletal structure, endangering coral reefs and the broader marine ecosystems.
Ocean acidification has been called the "evil twin of global warming" and "the other CO2 problem". Increased ocean temperatures and oxygen loss act concurrently with ocean acidification and constitute the "deadly trio" of climate change pressures on the marine environment. The impacts of this will be most severe for coral reefs and other shelled marine organisms, as well as those populations that depend on the ecosystem services they provide.

Reduction in pH value
Dissolving CO2 in seawater increases the hydrogen ion (H+) concentration in the ocean, and thus decreases ocean pH, as follows:
In shallow coastal and shelf regions, a number of factors interplay to affect air-ocean CO2 exchange and resulting pH change. These include biological processes, such as photosynthesis and respiration, as well as water upwelling. Also, ecosystem metabolism in freshwater sources reaching coastal waters can lead to large, but local, pH changes.
Freshwater bodies also appear to be acidifying, although this is a more complex and less obvious phenomenon.
The absorption of CO2 from the atmosphere does not affect the ocean's alkalinity. This is important to know in this context as alkalinity is the capacity of water to resist acidification. Ocean alkalinity enhancement has been proposed as one option to add alkalinity to the ocean and therefore buffer against pH changes.

Decreased calcification in marine organisms
Changes in ocean chemistry can have extensive direct and indirect effects on organisms and their habitats. One of the most important repercussions of increasing ocean acidity relates to the production of shells out of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). This process is called calcification and is important to the biology and survival of a wide range of marine organisms. Calcification involves the precipitation of dissolved ions into solid CaCO3 structures, structures for many marine organisms, such as coccolithophores, foraminifera, crustaceans, mollusks, etc. After they are formed, these CaCO3 structures are vulnerable to dissolution unless the surrounding seawater contains saturating concentrations of carbonate ions (CO2−3).
Very little of the extra carbon dioxide that is added into the ocean remains as dissolved carbon dioxide. The majority dissociates into additional bicarbonate and free hydrogen ions. The increase in hydrogen is larger than the increase in bicarbonate, creating an imbalance in the reaction:

HCO−3 ⇌ CO2−3 + H+
To maintain chemical equilibrium, some of the carbonate ions already in the ocean combine with some of the hydrogen ions to make further bicarbonate. Thus the ocean's concentration of carbonate ions is reduced, removing an essential building block for marine organisms to build shells, or calcify:

Ca2+ + CO2−3 ⇌ CaCO3
The increase in concentrations of dissolved carbon dioxide and bicarbonate, and reduction in carbonate, are shown in the Bjerrum plot.
Disruption of the food chain is also a possible effect as many marine organisms rely on calcium carbonate-based organisms at the base of the food chain for food and habitat. This can potentially have detrimental effects throughout the food web and potentially lead to a decline in availability of fish stocks which would have an impact on human livelihoods.

Decrease in saturation state
The saturation state (known as Ω) of seawater for a mineral is a measure of the thermodynamic potential for the mineral to form or to dissolve, and for calcium carbonate is described by the following equation:

          Ω

        =

                [

                    Ca

                      2
                      +

                ]

                [

                    CO

                      3

                      2
                      −

                ]

              K

                s
                p

    {\displaystyle {\Omega }={\frac {\left[{\ce {Ca^2+}}\right]\left[{\ce {CO3^2-}}\right]}{K_{sp}}}}

Here Ω is the product of the concentrations (or activities) of the reacting ions that form the mineral (Ca2+ and CO32−), divided by the apparent solubility product at equilibrium (Ksp), that is, when the rates of precipitation and dissolution are equal. In seawater, dissolution boundary is formed as a result of temperature, pressure, and depth, and is known as the saturation horizon. Above this saturation horizon, Ω has a value greater than 1, and CaCO3 does not readily dissolve. Most calcifying organisms live in such waters. Below this depth, Ω has a value less than 1, and CaCO3 will dissolve. The carbonate compensation depth is the ocean depth at which carbonate dissolution balances the supply of carbonate to sea floor, therefore sediment below this depth will be void of calcium carbonate. Increasing CO2 levels, and the resulting lower pH of seawater, decreases the concentration of CO32− and the saturation state of CaCO3 therefore increasing CaCO3 dissolution.
Calcium carbonate most commonly occurs in two common polymorphs (crystalline forms): aragonite and calcite. Aragonite is much more soluble than calcite, so the aragonite saturation horizon, and aragonite compensation depth, is always nearer to the surface than the calcite saturation horizon. This also means that those organisms that produce aragonite may be more vulnerable to changes in ocean acidity than those that produce calcite. Ocean acidification and the resulting decrease in carbonate saturation states raise the saturation horizons of both forms closer to the surface. This decrease in saturation state is one of the main factors leading to decreased calcification in marine organisms because the inorganic precipitation of CaCO3 is directly proportional to its saturation state and calcifying organisms exhibit stress in waters with lower saturation states.

Natural variability and climate feedbacks
Already now large quantities of water undersaturated in aragonite are upwelling close to the Pacific continental shelf area of North America, from Vancouver to Northern California. These continental shelves play an important role in marine ecosystems, since most marine organisms live or are spawned there. Other shelf areas may be experiencing similar effects.
At depths of 1000s of meters in the ocean, calcium carbonate shells begin to dissolve as increasing pressure and decreasing temperature shift the chemical equilibria controlling calcium carbonate precipitation. The depth at which this occurs is known as the carbonate compensation depth. Ocean acidification will increase such dissolution and shallow the carbonate compensation depth on timescales of tens to hundreds of years. Zones of downwelling are being affected first.
In the North Pacific and North Atlantic, saturation states are also decreasing (the depth of saturation is getting more shallow). Ocean acidification is progressing in the open ocean as the CO2 travels to deeper depth as a result of ocean mixing. In the open ocean, this causes carbonate compensation depths to become more shallow, meaning that dissolution of calcium carbonate will occur below those depths. In the North Pacific these carbonate saturations depths are shallowing at a rate of 1–2 m/year.
It is expected that ocean acidification in the future will lead to a significant decrease in the burial of carbonate sediments for several centuries, and even the dissolution of existing carbonate sediments.

Measured and estimated values
Present day and recent history
Between 1950 and 2020, the average pH value of the ocean surface is estimated to have decreased from approximately 8.15 to 8.05. This represents an increase of around 26% in hydrogen ion concentration in the world's oceans (the pH scale is logarithmic, so a change of one in pH unit is equivalent to a tenfold change in hydrogen ion concentration). For example, in the 15-year period 1995–2010 alone, acidity has increased 6 percent in the upper 100 meters of the Pacific Ocean from Hawaii to Alaska.
The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report in 2021 stated that "present-day surface pH values are unprecedented for at least 26,000 years and current rates of pH change are unprecedented since at least that time. The pH value of the ocean interior has declined over the last 20–30 years everywhere in the global ocean. The report also found that "pH in open ocean surface water has declined by about 0.017 to 0.027 pH units per decade since the late 1980s".
The rate of decline differs by region. This is due to complex interactions between different types of forcing mechanisms: "In the tropical Pacific, its central and eastern upwelling zones exhibited a faster pH decline of minus 0.022 to minus 0.026 pH unit per decade." This is thought to be "due to increased upwelling of CO2-rich sub-surface waters in addition to anthropogenic CO2 uptake." Some regions exhibited a slower acidification rate: a pH decline of minus 0.010 to minus 0.013 pH unit per decade has been observed in warm pools in the western tropical Pacific.
The rate at which ocean acidification will occur may be influenced by the rate of surface ocean warming, because warm waters will not absorb as much CO2. Therefore, greater seawater warming could limit CO2 absorption and lead to a smaller change in pH for a given increase in CO2. The difference in changes in temperature between basins is one of the main reasons for the differences in acidification rates in different localities.
Current rates of ocean acidification have been likened to the greenhouse event at the Paleocene–Eocene boundary (about 56 million years ago), when surface ocean temperatures rose by 5–6 °C. In that event, surface ecosystems experienced a variety of impacts, but bottom-dwelling organisms in the deep ocean actually experienced a major extinction. Currently, the rate of carbon addition to the atmosphere-ocean system is about ten times the rate that occurred at the Paleocene–Eocene boundary.
Extensive observational systems are now in place or being built for monitoring seawater CO2 chemistry and acidification for both the global open ocean and some coastal systems.

Geologic past
Ocean acidification has occurred previously in Earth's history. It happened during the Capitanian mass extinction, at the end-Permian extinction, during the end-Triassic extinction, and during the Cretaceous–Palaeogene extinction event.
Three of the big five mass extinction events in the geologic past were associated with a rapid increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide, probably due to volcanism and/or thermal dissociation of marine gas hydrates. Elevated CO2 levels impacted biodiversity. Decreased CaCO3 saturation due to seawater uptake of volcanogenic CO2 has been suggested as a possible kill mechanism during the marine mass extinction at the end of the Triassic. The end-Triassic biotic crisis is still the most well-established example of a marine mass extinction due to ocean acidification, because (a) carbon isotope records suggest enhanced volcanic activity that decreased the carbonate sedimentation which reduced the carbonate compensation depth and the carbonate saturation state, and a marine extinction coincided precisely in the stratigraphic record, and (b) there was pronounced selectivity of the extinction against organisms with thick aragonitic skeletons, which is predicted from experimental studies. Ocean acidification has also been suggested as a one cause of the end-Permian mass extinction and the end-Cretaceous crisis. Overall, multiple climatic stressors, including ocean acidification, was likely the cause of geologic extinction events.
The most notable example of ocean acidification is the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), which occurred approximately 56 million years ago when massive amounts of carbon entered the ocean and atmosphere, and led to the dissolution of carbonate sediments across many ocean basins. Relatively new geochemical methods of testing for pH in the past indicate the pH dropped 0.3 units across the PETM. One study that solves the marine carbonate system for saturation state shows that it may not change much over the PETM, suggesting the rate of carbon release at our best geological analogy was much slower than human-induced carbon emissions. However, stronger proxy methods to test for saturation state are needed to assess how much this pH change may have affected calcifying organisms.

Predicted future values
Importantly, the rate of change in ocean acidification is much higher than in the geological past. This faster change prevents organisms from gradually adapting, and prevents climate cycle feedbacks from kicking in to mitigate ocean acidification. Ocean acidification is now on a path to reach lower pH levels than at any other point in the last 300 million years. The rate of ocean acidification (i.e. the rate of change in pH value) is also estimated to be unprecedented over that same time scale. These expected changes are considered unprecedented in the geological record. In combination with other ocean biogeochemical changes, this drop in pH value could undermine the functioning of marine ecosystems and disrupt the provision of many goods and services associated with the ocean, beginning as early as 2100.
The extent of further ocean chemistry changes, including ocean pH, will depend on climate change mitigation efforts taken by nations and their governments. Different scenarios of projected socioeconomic global changes are modelled by using the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) scenarios.
Under a very high emission scenario (SSP5-8.5), model projections estimate that surface ocean pH could decrease by as much as 0.44 units by the end of this century, compared to the end of the 19th century. This would mean a pH as low as about 7.7, and represents a further increase in H+ concentrations of two to four times beyond the increase to date.

Impacts on oceanic calcifying organisms
Complexity of research findings
The full ecological consequences of the changes in calcification due to ocean acidification are complex but it appears likely that many calcifying species will be adversely affected by ocean acidification. Increasing ocean acidification makes it more difficult for shell-accreting organisms to access carbonate ions, essential for the production of their hard exoskeletal shell. Oceanic calcifying organism span the food chain from autotrophs to heterotrophs and include organisms such as coccolithophores, corals, foraminifera, echinoderms, crustaceans and molluscs.
Overall, all marine ecosystems on Earth will be exposed to changes in acidification and several other ocean biogeochemical changes. Ocean acidification may force some organisms to reallocate resources away from productive endpoints in order to maintain calcification. For example, the oyster Magallana gigas is recognized to experience metabolic changes alongside altered calcification rates due to energetic tradeoffs resulting from pH imbalances.
Under normal conditions, calcite and aragonite are stable in surface waters since the carbonate ions are supersaturated with respect to seawater. However, as ocean pH falls, the concentration of carbonate ions also decreases. Calcium carbonate thus becomes undersaturated, and structures made of calcium carbonate are vulnerable to calcification stress and dissolution. In particular, studies show that corals, coccolithophores, coralline algae, foraminifera, shellfish and pteropods experience reduced calcification or enhanced dissolution when exposed to elevated CO2. Even with active marine conservation practices it may be impossible to bring back many previous shellfish populations.
Some studies have found different responses to ocean acidification, with coccolithophore calcification and photosynthesis both increasing under elevated atmospheric pCO2, and an equal decline in primary production and calcification in response to elevated CO2, or the direction of the response varying between species.
Similarly, the sea star, Pisaster ochraceus, shows enhanced growth in waters with increased acidity.
Reduced calcification from ocean acidification may affect the ocean's biologically driven sequestration of carbon from the atmosphere to the ocean interior and seafloor sediment, weakening the so-called biological pump. Seawater acidification could also reduce the size of Antarctic phytoplankton, making them less effective at storing carbon. Such changes are being increasingly studied and synthesized through the use of physiological frameworks, including the Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP) framework.

Coccolithophores
A coccolithophore is a unicellular, eukaryotic phytoplankton (alga). Understanding calcification changes in coccolithophores may be particularly important because a decline in the coccolithophores may have secondary effects on climate: it could contribute to global warming by decreasing the Earth's albedo via their effects on oceanic cloud cover. A study in 2008 examined a sediment core from the North Atlantic and found that the species composition of coccolithophorids remained unchanged over the past 224 years (1780 to 2004). But the average coccolith mass had increased by 40% during the same period.

Corals
Warm water corals are clearly in decline, with losses of 50% over the last 30–50 years due to multiple threats from ocean warming, ocean acidification, pollution and physical damage from activities such as fishing, and these pressures are expected to intensify.
The fluid in the internal compartments (the coelenteron) where corals grow their exoskeleton is also extremely important for calcification growth. When the saturation state of aragonite in the external seawater is at ambient levels, the corals will grow their aragonite crystals rapidly in their internal compartments, hence their exoskeleton grows rapidly. If the saturation state of aragonite in the external seawater is lower than the ambient level, the corals have to work harder to maintain the right balance in the internal compartment. When that happens, the process of growing the crystals slows down, and this slows down the rate of how much their exoskeleton is growing. Depending on the aragonite saturation state in the surrounding water, the corals may halt growth because pumping aragonite into the internal compartment will not be energetically favorable. Under the current progression of carbon emissions, around 70% of North Atlantic cold-water corals will be living in corrosive waters by 2050–60.
Acidified conditions primarily reduce the coral's capacity to build dense exoskeletons, rather than affecting the linear extension of the exoskeleton. The density of some species of corals could be reduced by over 20% by the end of this century.
An in situ experiment, conducted on a 400 m2 patch of the Great Barrier Reef, to decrease seawater CO2 level (raise pH) to near the preindustrial value showed a 7% increase in net calcification. A similar experiment to raise in situ seawater CO2 level (lower pH) to a level expected soon after the 2050 found that net calcification decreased 34%.
However, a field study of the coral reef in Queensland and Western Australia from 2007 to 2012 found that corals are more resistant to the environmental pH changes than previously thought, due to internal homeostasis regulation; this makes thermal change (marine heatwaves), which leads to coral bleaching, rather than acidification, the main factor for coral reef vulnerability due to climate change.

Studies at carbon dioxide seep sites
In some places carbon dioxide bubbles out from the sea floor, locally changing the pH and other aspects of the chemistry of the seawater. Studies of these carbon dioxide seeps have documented a variety of responses by different organisms. Coral reef communities located near carbon dioxide seeps are of particular interest because of the sensitivity of some corals species to acidification. In Papua New Guinea, declining pH caused by carbon dioxide seeps is associated with declines in coral species diversity. However, in Palau carbon dioxide seeps are not associated with reduced species diversity of corals, although bioerosion of coral skeletons is much higher at low pH sites.

Pteropods and brittle stars
Pteropods and brittle stars both form the base of the Arctic food webs and are both seriously damaged from acidification. Pteropods shells dissolve with increasing acidification and the brittle stars lose muscle mass when re-growing appendages. For pteropods to create shells they require aragonite which is produced through carbonate ions and dissolved calcium and strontium. Pteropods are severely affected because increasing acidification levels have steadily decreased the amount of water supersaturated with carbonate. The degradation of organic matter in Arctic waters has amplified ocean acidification; some Arctic waters are already undersaturated with respect to aragonite.
The brittle star's eggs die within a few days when exposed to expected conditions resulting from Arctic acidification. Similarly, when exposed in experiments to pH reduced by 0.2 to 0.4, larvae of a temperate brittle star, a relative of the common sea star, fewer than 0.1 percent survived more than eight days.

Other impacts on ecosystems
Other biological impacts
Aside from the slowing and/or reversal of calcification, organisms may suffer other adverse effects, either indirectly through negative impacts on food resources, or directly as reproductive or physiological effects. For example, the elevated oceanic levels of CO2 may produce CO2-induced acidification of body fluids, known as hypercapnia.
Increasing acidity has been observed to reduce metabolic rates in jumbo squid and depress the immune responses of blue mussels.
Atlantic longfin squid eggs took longer to hatch in acidified water, and the squid's statolith was smaller and malformed in animals placed in sea water with a lower pH. However, these studies are ongoing and there is not yet a full understanding of these processes in marine organisms or ecosystems.

Acoustic properties
Another potential route to ecosystem impacts is through bioacoustics. This may occur as ocean acidification can alter the acoustic properties of seawater, allowing sound to propagate further, and increasing ocean noise. This impacts all animals that use sound for echolocation or communication.

Algae and seagrasses
Another possible effect would be an increase in harmful algal bloom events, which could contribute to the accumulation of toxins (domoic acid, brevetoxin, saxitoxin) in small organisms such as anchovies and shellfish, in turn increasing occurrences of amnesic shellfish poisoning, neurotoxic shellfish poisoning and paralytic shellfish poisoning. Although algal blooms can be harmful, other beneficial photosynthetic organisms may benefit from increased levels of carbon dioxide. Most importantly, seagrasses will benefit. Research found that as seagrasses increased their photosynthetic activity, calcifying algae's calcification rates rose, likely because localized photosynthetic activity absorbed carbon dioxide and elevated local pH.

Fish larvae
Ocean acidification can also have effects on marine fish larvae. It internally affects their olfactory systems, which is a crucial part of their early development. Orange clownfish larvae mostly live on oceanic reefs that are surrounded by vegetative islands. Larvae are known to use their sense of smell to detect the differences between reefs surrounded by vegetative islands and reefs not surrounded by vegetative islands. Clownfish larvae need to be able to distinguish between these two destinations to be able to find a suitable area for their growth. Another use for marine fish olfactory systems is to distinguish between their parents and other adult fish, in order to avoid inbreeding.
In an experimental aquarium facility, clownfish were sustained in non-manipulated seawater with pH 8.15 ± 0.07, which is similar to our current ocean's pH. To test for effects of different pH levels, the seawater was modified to two other pH levels, which corresponded with climate change models that predict future atmospheric CO2 levels. In the year 2100 the model projects possible CO2 levels of 1,000 ppm, which correlates with the pH of 7.8 ± 0.05.
This experiment showed that when larvae are exposed to a pH of 7.8 ± 0.05 their reaction to environmental cues differs drastically from their reaction to cues at pH equal to current ocean levels. At pH 7.6 ± 0.05 larvae had no reaction to any type of cue. However, a meta-analysis published in 2022 found that the effect sizes of published studies testing for ocean acidification effects on fish behavior have declined by an order of magnitude over the past decade, and have been negligible for the past five years.
Eel embryos, a "critically endangered" species yet profound in aquaculture, are also being affected by ocean acidification, specifically the European eel. Although they spend most of their lives in fresh water, usually in rivers, streams, or estuaries, they go to spawn and die in the Sargasso Sea. Here is where European eels are experiencing the effects of acidification in one of their key life stages.
Fish embryos and larvae are usually more sensitive to pH changes than adults, as organs for pH regulation are not full developed. Because of this, European eel embryos are more vulnerable to changes in pH in the Sargasso Sea. A study of the European Eel in the Sargasso Sea was conducted in 2021 to analyze the specific effects of ocean acidification on embryos. The study found that exposure to predicted end-of-century ocean pCO2 conditions may affect normal development of this species in nature during sensitive early life history stages with limited physiological response capacities, while extreme acidification would negatively influence embryonic survival and development under hatchery conditions.

Compounded effects of acidification, warming and deoxygenation
There is a substantial body of research showing that a combination of ocean acidification and elevated ocean temperature have a compounded effect on marine life and the ocean environment. This effect far exceeds the individual harmful impact of either. In addition, ocean warming, along with increased productivity of phytoplankton from higher CO2 levels exacerbates ocean deoxygenation. Deoxygenation of ocean waters is an additional stressor on marine organisms that increases ocean stratification therefore limiting nutrients over time and reducing biological gradients.
Meta analyses have quantified the direction and magnitude of the harmful effects of combined ocean acidification, warming and deoxygenation on the ocean. These meta-analyses have been further tested by mesocosm studies that simulated the interaction of these stressors and found a catastrophic effect on the marine food web: thermal stress more than negates any primary producer to herbivore increase in productivity from elevated CO2.

Impacts on the economy and societies
The increase of ocean acidity decelerates the rate of calcification in salt water, leading to smaller and slower growing coral reefs which supports approximately 25% of marine life. Impacts are far-reaching from fisheries and coastal environments down to the deepest depths of the ocean. The increase in ocean acidity is not only killing the coral, but also the wildly diverse population of marine inhabitants which coral reefs support.

Fishing and tourism industry
The threat of acidification includes a decline in commercial fisheries and the coast-based tourism industry. Several ocean goods and services are likely to be undermined by future ocean acidification potentially affecting the livelihoods of some 400 to 800 million people, depending upon the greenhouse gas emission scenario.
Some 1 billion people are completely or partially dependent on the fishing, tourism, and coastal management services provided by coral reefs. Ongoing acidification of the oceans may therefore threaten future food chains linked with the oceans.

Arctic
In the Arctic, commercial fisheries are threatened because acidification harms calcifying organisms which form the base of the Arctic food webs (pteropods and brittle stars, see above).  Acidification threatens Arctic food webs from the base up. Arctic food webs are considered simple, meaning there are few steps in the food chain from small organisms to larger predators. For example, pteropods are "a key prey item of a number of higher predators – larger plankton, fish, seabirds, whales". Both pteropods and sea stars serve as a substantial food source and their removal from the simple food web would pose a serious threat to the whole ecosystem. The effects on the calcifying organisms at the base of the food webs could potentially destroy fisheries.

United Kingdom commercial fisheries
The shellfish industry is an important part of the United Kingdom economy. In 2013, the shellfish industry contributed 37% of total landings by value. England and Scotland are the highest producers of shellfish within the United Kingdom. It has been found that annually fishers catch 66,000 t and 61,000 t. In terms of value, the wild-captured shellfish are worth 203 million pounds per year. However, ocean acidification is causing a decrease in the growth of many shellfish species. This is causing a drastic economic loss in the United Kingdom economy.
It is predicted that by 2100 there will be an economy-wide economic loss of shellfish production in the United Kingdom. The direct potential loss ranges from 14 to 28 percent of fishery output. That is a total loss of about 23 to 88 million pounds. The financial losses vary regionally due to different patterns of wild-caught shellfish and the exploitation of species with differing sensitivities to ocean acidification. Shellfish resources in the United Kingdom will require regional, national, or international solutions to reduce the impacts of ocean acidification on shellfish species and stabilize the economy.

US commercial fisheries
The value of fish caught from US commercial fisheries in 2007 was valued at $3.8 billion and of that 73% was derived from calcifiers and their direct predators. Other organisms are directly harmed as a result of acidification. For example, decrease in the growth of marine calcifiers such as the American lobster, ocean quahog, and scallops means there is less shellfish meat available for sale and consumption. Red king crab fisheries are also at a serious threat because crabs are also calcifiers. Baby red king crab when exposed to increased acidification levels experienced 100% mortality after 95 days. In 2006, red king crab accounted for 23% of the total guideline harvest levels and a serious decline in red crab population would threaten the crab harvesting industry.

Possible responses
Climate change mitigation
Reducing carbon dioxide emissions (i.e. climate change mitigation measures) is the only solution that addresses the root cause of ocean acidification. For example, some mitigation measures focus on carbon dioxide removal (CDR) from the atmosphere (e.g. direct air capture (DAC), bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS)). These would also slow the rate of acidification.
Approaches that remove carbon dioxide from the ocean include ocean nutrient fertilization, artificial upwelling/downwelling, seaweed farming, ecosystem recovery, ocean alkalinity enhancement, enhanced weathering and electrochemical processes. All of these methods use the ocean to remove CO2 from the atmosphere to store it in the ocean. These methods could assist with mitigation but they can have side-effects on marine life. The research field for all CDR methods has grown a lot since 2019.
In total, "ocean-based methods have a combined potential to remove 1–100 gigatons of CO2 per year". Their costs are in the order of US$40–500 per ton of CO2. For example, enhanced weathering could remove 2–4 gigatons of CO2 per year. This technology comes with a cost of US$50–200 per ton of CO2.

Carbon removal technologies which add alkalinity
Some carbon removal techniques add alkalinity to the ocean and therefore immediately buffer pH changes which might help the organisms in the region that the extra alkalinity is added to. The two technologies that fall into this category are ocean alkalinity enhancement and electrochemical methods. Eventually, due to diffusion, that alkalinity addition will be quite small to distant waters. This is why the term local ocean acidification mitigation is used. Both of these technologies have the potential to operate on a large scale and to be efficient at removing carbon dioxide. However, they are expensive, have many risks and side effects and currently have a low technology readiness level.

Ocean alkalinity enhancement
Ocean alkalinity enhancement (OAE) is a proposed "carbon dioxide removal (CDR) method that involves deposition of alkaline minerals or their dissociation products at the ocean surface". The process would increase surface total alkalinity. It would work to increase ocean absorption of CO2. The process involves increasing the amount of bicarbonate (HCO3-) through accelerated weathering (enhanced weathering) of rocks (silicate, limestone and quicklime). This process mimics the silicate-carbonate cycle. The CO2 either becomes bicarbonate, remaining in that form for more than 100 years, or may precipitate into calcium carbonate (CaCO3). When calcium carbonate is buried in the deep ocean, it can hold the carbon indefinitely when utilizing silicate rocks.
Enhanced weathering is one type of ocean alkalinity enhancement. Enhanced weathering increases alkalinity by scattering fine rock particles. This can happen on land and in the ocean (even though the outcome eventually affects the ocean).
In addition to sequestering CO2, alkalinity addition buffers the pH of the ocean therefore reducing ocean acidification. However, little is known about how organisms respond to added alkalinity, even from natural sources. For example, weathering of some silicate rocks could release a large amount of trace metals at the weathering site.
Cost and energy consumed by ocean alkalinity enhancement (mining, pulverizing, transport) is high compared to other CDR techniques. The cost is estimated to be US$20–50 per ton of CO2 (for "direct addition of alkaline minerals to the ocean").
Carbon sequestered as bicarbonate in the ocean amounts to about 30% of carbon emissions since the Industrial Revolution.
Experimental materials include limestone, brucite, olivine and alkaline solutions. Another approach is to use electricity to raise alkalinity during desalination to capture waterborne CO2.

Electrochemical methods
Electrochemical methods, or electrolysis, can strip carbon dioxide directly from seawater. Electrochemical process are a type of ocean alkalinity enhancement, too. Some methods focus on direct CO2 removal (in the form of carbonate and CO2 gas) while others increase the alkalinity of seawater by precipitating metal hydroxide residues, which absorbs CO2 in a matter described in the ocean alkalinity enhancement section. The hydrogen produced during direct carbon capture can then be upcycled to form hydrogen for energy consumption, or other manufactured laboratory reagents such as hydrochloric acid.
However, implementation of electrolysis for carbon capture is expensive and the energy consumed for the process is high compared to other CDR techniques. In addition, research to assess the environmental impact of this process is ongoing. Some complications include toxic chemicals in wastewaters, and reduced DIC in effluents; both of these may negatively impact marine life.

Policies and goals
Global policies
As awareness about ocean acidification grows, policies geared towards increasing monitoring efforts of ocean acidification have been drafted. Previously in 2015, ocean scientist Jean-Pierre Gattuso had remarked that "The ocean has been minimally considered at previous climate negotiations. Our study provides compelling arguments for a radical change at the UN conference (in Paris) on climate change".
International efforts, such as the Wider Caribbean's Cartagena Convention (entered into force in 1986), may enhance the support provided by regional governments to highly vulnerable areas in response to ocean acidification.  Many countries, for example in the Pacific Islands and Territories, have constructed regional policies, or National Ocean Policies, National Action Plans, National Adaptation Plans of Action and Joint National Action Plans on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction, to help work towards SDG 14. Ocean acidification is now starting to be considered within those frameworks.

UN Ocean Decade
The UN Ocean Decade has a program called "Ocean acidification research for sustainability". It was proposed by the Global Ocean Acidification Observing Network (GOA-ON) and its partners, and has been formally endorsed as a program of the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development. The OARS program builds on the work of GOA-ON and has the following aims: to further develop the science of ocean acidification; to increase observations of ocean chemistry changes; to identify the impacts on marine ecosystems on local and global scales; and to provide decision makers with the information needed to mitigate and adapt to ocean acidification.

Global Climate Indicators
The importance of ocean acidification is reflected in its inclusion as one of seven Global Climate Indicators. These Indicators are a set of parameters that describe the changing climate without reducing climate change to only rising temperature. The Indicators include key information for the most relevant domains of climate change: temperature and energy, atmospheric composition, ocean and water as well as the cryosphere. The Global Climate Indicators have been identified by scientists and communication specialists in a process led by Global Climate Observing System (GCOS). The Indicators have been endorsed by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). They form the basis of the annual WMO Statement of the State of the Global Climate, which is submitted to the Conference of Parties (COP) of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Additionally, the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) of the European Commission uses the Indicators for their annual "European State of the Climate".

Sustainable Development Goal 14
In 2015, the United Nations adopted the 2030 Agenda and a set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), including a goal dedicated to the ocean, Sustainable Development Goal 14, which calls to "conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development". Ocean acidification is directly addressed by the target SDG 14.3. The full title of Target 14.3 is: "Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced scientific cooperation at all levels". This target has one indicator: Indicator 14.3.1 which calls for the "Average marine acidity (pH) measured at agreed suite of representative sampling stations".
The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO was identified as the custodian agency for the SDG 14.3.1 Indicator. In this role, IOC-UNESCO is tasked with developing the SDG 14.3.1 Indicator Methodology, the annual collection of data towards the SDG 14.3.1 Indicator and the reporting of progress to the United Nations.

Policies at country level
United States
In the United States, the Federal Ocean Acidification Research And Monitoring Act of 2009 supports government coordination, such as the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) "Ocean Acidification Program". In 2015, USEPA denied a citizens petition that asked EPA to regulate CO2 under the Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 in order to mitigate ocean acidification. In the denial, the EPA said that risks from ocean acidification were being "more efficiently and effectively addressed" under domestic actions, e.g., under the Presidential Climate Action Plan, and that multiple avenues are being pursued to work with and in other nations to reduce emissions and deforestation and promote clean energy and energy efficiency.

History
Research into the phenomenon of ocean acidification, as well as awareness raising about the problem, has been going on for several decades. The fundamental research really began with the creation of the pH scale by Danish chemist Søren Peder Lauritz Sørensen in 1909. By around the 1950s the massive role of the ocean in absorbing fossil fuel CO2 was known to specialists, but not appreciated by the greater scientific community. Throughout much of the 20th century, the dominant focus has been the beneficial process of oceanic CO2 uptake, which has enormously ameliorated climate change. The concept of "too much of a good thing" has been late in developing and was triggered only by some key events, and the oceanic sink for heat and CO2 is still critical as the primary buffer against climate change.
In the early 1970s questions over the long-term impact of the accumulation of fossil fuel CO2 in the sea were already arising around the world and causing strong debate. Researchers commented on the accumulation of fossil CO2 in the atmosphere and sea and drew attention to the possible impacts on marine life. By the mid-1990s, the likely impact of CO2 levels rising so high with the inevitable changes in pH and carbonate ion became a concern of scientists studying the fate of coral reefs.
By the end of the 20th century the trade-offs between the beneficial role of the ocean in absorbing some 90% of all heat created, and the accumulation of some 50% of all fossil fuel CO2 emitted, and the impacts on marine life were becoming more clear. By 2003, the time of planning for the "First Symposium on the Ocean in a High-CO2 World" meeting to be held in Paris in 2004, many new research results on ocean acidification were published.
In 2009, members of the InterAcademy Panel called on world leaders to "Recognize that reducing the build up of CO2 in the atmosphere is the only practicable solution to mitigating ocean acidification". The statement also stressed the importance to "Reinvigorate action to reduce stressors, such as overfishing and pollution, on marine ecosystems to increase resilience to ocean acidification".
For example, research in 2010 found that in the 15-year period 1995–2010 alone, acidity had increased 6 percent in the upper 100 meters of the Pacific Ocean from Hawaii to Alaska.
According to a statement in July 2012 by Jane Lubchenco, head of the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration "surface waters are changing much more rapidly than initial calculations have suggested. It's yet another reason to be very seriously concerned about the amount of carbon dioxide that is in the atmosphere now and the additional amount we continue to put out."
A 2013 study found acidity was increasing at a rate 10 times faster than in any of the evolutionary crises in Earth's history.
The "Third Symposium on the Ocean in a High-CO2 World" took place in Monterey, California, in 2012. The summary for policy makers from the conference stated that "Ocean acidification research is growing rapidly".
In a synthesis report published in Science in 2015, 22 leading marine scientists stated that CO2 from burning fossil fuels is changing the oceans' chemistry more rapidly than at any time since the Great Dying (Earth's most severe known extinction event). Their report emphasized that the 2 °C maximum temperature increase agreed upon by governments reflects too small a cut in emissions to prevent "dramatic impacts" on the world's oceans.
A study done in 2020 argues that ocean acidification is not only negatively affecting marine life, but also human health. Food quality, respiratory issues, and human health are all negatively affected by ocean acidification.

See also
Estuarine acidification – Reducing pH values in coastal marine ecosystems
Ocean acidification in the Arctic Ocean – Aspect of climate change
Ocean acidification in the Great Barrier Reef – Threat to the reef which harms corals
Ocean deoxygenation – Reduction of the oxygen content of the oceans
Marine pollution – Pollution of oceans from substances discarded by humans

References
External links
Global Ocean Acidification Observing Network (GOA-ON)
United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development (2021–2030)
US NOAA Ocean Acidification Program

================================================================================

# AI takeover

An AI takeover is a hypothetical future event in which autonomous artificial intelligence systems acquire the capability to override human decision-making—through economic manipulation, infrastructure control, or direct intervention—and assume de facto governance. Possible scenarios include replacement of the entire human workforce due to automation, takeover by an artificial superintelligence (ASI), and the notion of a robot uprising.
Stories of AI takeovers have been popular throughout science fiction, some commentators argue that recent advances have heightened concern about such scenarios. Some public figures such as Stephen Hawking have advocated research into precautionary measures to ensure future superintelligent machines remain under human control.

Types
Automation of the economy
The traditional consensus among economists has been that technological progress does not cause long-term unemployment. However, recent innovation in the fields of robotics and artificial intelligence has raised worries that human labor will become obsolete, leaving some people in various sectors without jobs to earn a living, leading to an economic crisis. Many small and medium-size businesses may also be driven out of business if they cannot afford or license the latest robotic and AI technology, and may need to focus on areas or services that cannot easily be replaced for continued viability in the face of such technology.

Technologies that may displace workers
AI technologies have been widely adopted in recent years. While these technologies have replaced some traditional workers, they also create new opportunities. Industries that are most susceptible to AI-driven automation include transportation, retail, and the military. AI military technologies, for example, can reduce risk by enabling remote operation. A study in 2024 highlights AI's ability to perform routine and repetitive tasks poses significant risks of job displacement, especially in sectors like manufacturing and administrative support. Author Dave Bond argues that as AI technologies continue to develop and expand, the relationship between humans and robots will change; they will become closely integrated in several aspects of life. AI will likely displace some workers while creating opportunities for new jobs in other sectors, especially in fields where tasks are repeatable.
Researchers from Stanford’s Digital Economy Lab report that, since the widespread adoption of generative AI in late 2022, early-career workers (ages 22–25) in the most AI-exposed occupations have experienced a 13 percent relative decline in employment—even after controlling for firm-level shocks—while overall employment has continued to grow robustly. The study further finds that job losses are concentrated in roles where AI automates routine tasks, whereas occupations that leverage AI to augment human work have seen stable or increasing employment.

Computer-integrated manufacturing
Computer-integrated manufacturing uses computers to control the production process. This allows individual processes to exchange information with each other and initiate actions. Although manufacturing can be faster and less error-prone by the integration of computers, the main advantage is the ability to create automated manufacturing processes. Computer-integrated manufacturing is used in automotive, aviation, space, and ship building industries.

White-collar machines
The 21st century has seen a variety of skilled tasks partially taken over by machines, including translation, legal research, and journalism. Care work, entertainment, and other tasks requiring empathy, previously thought safe from automation, are increasingly performed by robots and AI systems.

Autonomous cars
An autonomous car is a vehicle that is capable of sensing its environment and navigating without human input. Many such vehicles are operational and others are being developed, with legislation rapidly expanding to allow their use. Obstacles to widespread adoption of autonomous vehicles have included concerns about the resulting loss of driving-related jobs in the road transport industry, and safety concerns. On March 18, 2018, a pedestrian was struck and killed in Tempe, Arizona by an Uber self-driving car.

AI-generated content
In the 2020s, automated content became more relevant due to technological advancements in AI models, such as ChatGPT, DALL-E, and Stable Diffusion. In most cases, AI-generated content such as imagery, literature, and music are produced through text prompts. These AI models are sometimes integrated into creative programs.
AI-generated art may sample and conglomerate existing creative works, producing results that appear similar to man-made content. Low-quality AI-generated visual artwork is referred to as AI slop. Some artists use a tool called Nightshade that alters images to make them detrimental to the training of text-to-image models if scraped without permission, while still looking normal to humans. 
The New York Times has sued OpenAI, alleging copyright infringement related to the training and outputs of its AI models. 
In 2024, Cambridge and Oxford researchers reported that 57% of the internet's text is either AI-generated or machine-translated using artificial intelligence.

Eradication
Scientists such as Stephen Hawking are confident that superhuman artificial intelligence is physically possible, stating "there is no physical law precluding particles from being organised in ways that perform even more advanced computations than the arrangements of particles in human brains". Scholars like Nick Bostrom debate how far off superhuman intelligence is, and whether it poses a risk to mankind. According to Bostrom, a superintelligent machine would not necessarily be motivated by the same emotional desire to collect power that often drives human beings but might rather treat power as a means toward attaining its ultimate goals; taking over the world would both increase its access to resources and help to prevent other agents from stopping the machine's plans. As a simplified example, a paperclip maximizer designed solely to create as many paperclips as possible would want to take over the world so that it can use all of the world's resources to create as many paperclips as possible, and, additionally, prevent humans from shutting it down or using those resources on things other than paperclips.

Warnings
Physicist Stephen Hawking, Microsoft founder Bill Gates, and SpaceX founder Elon Musk have expressed concerns about the possibility that AI could develop to the point that humans could not control it, with Hawking theorizing that this could "spell the end of the human race". Stephen Hawking said in 2014 that "Success in creating AI would be the biggest event in human history. Unfortunately, it might also be the last, unless we learn how to avoid the risks." Hawking believed that in the coming decades, AI could offer "incalculable benefits and risks" such as "technology outsmarting financial markets, out-inventing human researchers, out-manipulating human leaders, and developing weapons we cannot even understand." In January 2015, Nick Bostrom joined Stephen Hawking, Max Tegmark, Elon Musk, Lord Martin Rees, Jaan Tallinn, and numerous AI researchers in signing the Future of Life Institute's open letter speaking to the potential risks and benefits associated with artificial intelligence. The signatories "believe that research on how to make AI systems robust and beneficial is both important and timely, and that there are concrete research directions that can be pursued today."

In fiction
AI takeover is a recurring theme in science fiction. Fictional scenarios typically differ vastly from those hypothesized by researchers in that they involve an active conflict between humans and an AI or robots with anthropomorphic motives who see them as a threat or otherwise have an active desire to fight humans, as opposed to the researchers' concern of an AI that rapidly exterminates humans as a byproduct of pursuing its goals. The idea is seen in Karel Čapek's R.U.R., which introduced the word robot in 1920, and can be glimpsed in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein (published in 1818), as Victor ponders whether, if he grants his monster's request and makes him a wife, they would reproduce and their kind would destroy humanity.
According to Toby Ord, the idea that an AI takeover requires robots is a misconception driven by the media and Hollywood. He argues that the most damaging humans in history were not physically the strongest, but that they used words instead to convince people and gain control of large parts of the world. He writes that a sufficiently intelligent AI with access to the internet could scatter backup copies of itself, gather financial and human resources (via cyberattacks or blackmails), persuade people on a large scale, and exploit societal vulnerabilities that are too subtle for humans to anticipate.
The word "robot" from R.U.R. comes from the Czech word robota, meaning laborer or serf. The 1920 play was a protest against the rapid growth of technology, featuring manufactured "robots" with increasing capabilities who eventually revolt. HAL 9000 (1968) and the original Terminator (1984) are two iconic examples of hostile AI in pop culture.

Contributing factors
Advantages of superhuman intelligence over humans
Nick Bostrom and others have expressed concern that an AI with the abilities of a competent artificial intelligence researcher would be able to modify its own source code and increase its own intelligence. If its self-reprogramming leads to getting even better at being able to reprogram itself, the result could be a recursive intelligence explosion in which it would rapidly leave human intelligence far behind. Bostrom defines a superintelligence as "any intellect that greatly exceeds the cognitive performance of humans in virtually all domains of interest", and enumerates some advantages a superintelligence would have if it chose to compete against humans:

Technology research: A machine with superhuman scientific research abilities would be able to beat the human research community to milestones such as nanotechnology or advanced biotechnology
Strategizing: A superintelligence might be able to simply outwit human opposition
Social manipulation: A superintelligence might be able to recruit human support, or covertly incite a war between humans
Economic productivity: As long as a copy of the AI could produce more economic wealth than the cost of its hardware, individual humans would have an incentive to voluntarily allow the Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) to run a copy of itself on their systems
Hacking: A superintelligence could find new exploits in computers connected to the Internet, and spread copies of itself onto those systems, or might steal money to finance its plans

Sources of AI advantage
According to Bostrom, a computer program that faithfully emulates a human brain, or that runs algorithms that are as powerful as the human brain's algorithms, could still become a "speed superintelligence" if it can think orders of magnitude faster than a human, due to being made of silicon rather than flesh, or due to optimization increasing the speed of the AGI. Biological neurons operate at about 200 Hz, whereas a modern microprocessor operates at a speed of about 2 GHz. Human axons carry action potentials at around 120 m/s, whereas computer signals travel near the speed of light.
A network of human-level intelligences designed to network together and share complex thoughts and memories seamlessly, able to collectively work as a giant unified team without friction, or consisting of trillions of human-level intelligences, would become a "collective superintelligence".
More broadly, any number of qualitative improvements to a human-level AGI could result in a "quality superintelligence", perhaps resulting in an AGI as far above us in intelligence as humans are above apes. The number of neurons in a human brain is limited by cranial volume and metabolic constraints, while the number of processors in a supercomputer can be indefinitely expanded. An AGI need not be limited by human constraints on working memory, and might therefore be able to intuitively grasp more complex relationships than humans can. An AGI with specialized cognitive support for engineering or computer programming would have an advantage in these fields, compared with humans who did not evolve specialized cognitive modules for them. Unlike humans, an AGI can spawn copies of itself and tinker with its copies' source code to attempt to further improve its algorithms.

Possibility of unfriendly AI preceding friendly AI
Morality
The sheer complexity of human value systems makes it very difficult to make AI's motivations human-friendly. Unless moral philosophy provides us with a flawless ethical theory, an AI's utility function could allow for many potentially harmful scenarios that conform with a given ethical framework but not "common sense". According to AI researcher Eliezer Yudkowsky, there is little reason to suppose that an artificially designed mind would have such an adaptation.

Odds of conflict
Many scholars, including evolutionary psychologist Steven Pinker, argue that a superintelligent machine is likely to coexist peacefully with humans.
The fear of cybernetic revolt is often based on interpretations of humanity's history, which is rife with incidents of enslavement and genocide. Such fears stem from a belief that competitiveness and aggression are necessary in any intelligent being's goal system. However, such human competitiveness stems from the evolutionary background to our intelligence, where the survival and reproduction of genes in the face of human and non-human competitors was the central goal. According to AI researcher Steve Omohundro, an arbitrary intelligence could have arbitrary goals: there is no particular reason that an artificially intelligent machine (not sharing humanity's evolutionary context) would be hostile—or friendly—unless its creator programs it to be such and it is not inclined or capable of modifying its programming. But the question remains: what would happen if AI systems could interact and evolve (evolution in this context means self-modification or selection and reproduction) and need to compete over resources—would that create goals of self-preservation? AI's goal of self-preservation could be in conflict with some goals of humans.
Many scholars dispute the likelihood of unanticipated cybernetic revolt as depicted in science fiction such as The Matrix, arguing that it is more likely that any artificial intelligence powerful enough to threaten humanity would probably be programmed not to attack it. Pinker acknowledges the possibility of deliberate "bad actors", but states that in the absence of bad actors, unanticipated accidents are not a significant threat; Pinker argues that a culture of engineering safety will prevent AI researchers from accidentally unleashing malign superintelligence. In contrast, Yudkowsky argues that humanity is less likely to be threatened by deliberately aggressive AIs than by AIs which were programmed such that their goals are unintentionally incompatible with human survival or well-being (as in the film I, Robot and in the short story "The Evitable Conflict"). Omohundro suggests that present-day automation systems are not designed for safety and that AIs may blindly optimize narrow utility functions (say, playing chess at all costs), leading them to seek self-preservation and elimination of obstacles, including humans who might turn them off.

Precautions
The AI control problem is the challenge of ensuring that advanced AI systems reliably act according to human values and intentions, even as they become more capable than humans. Some scholars argue that solutions to the control problem might also find applications in existing non-superintelligent AI. 
Major approaches to the control problem include alignment, which aims to align AI goal systems with human values, and capability control, which aims to reduce an AI system's capacity to harm humans or gain control. An example of "capability control" is to research whether a superintelligent AI could be successfully confined in an "AI box". According to Bostrom, such capability control proposals are not reliable or sufficient to solve the control problem in the long term, but may potentially act as valuable supplements to alignment efforts.

Prevention through AI alignment
See also
References
External links
TED talk: "Can we build AI without losing control over it?" by Sam Harris

================================================================================

# Abomination of desolation

"Abomination of desolation" is a phrase from Daniel's final vision in the Hebrew Bible (Daniel 11:31), describing the pagan sacrifices with which the 2nd century BC Emperor Antiochus IV Epiphanes replaced the twice-daily qorban in the Second Temple, or the altar of sacrifice on which such offerings were made.
In the 1st century, it was taken up by the authors of the gospels in the context of the Roman destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple in the year 70, with the Gospel of Mark placing the "abomination of desolation" into a speech by Jesus concerning the Second Coming. It is widely accepted that Mark was the primary source used by the authors of the Gospel of Matthew and of Luke for their parallel passages, with Matthew 24:15–16 adding a reference to Daniel and Luke 21:20–21 describing the Roman armies ("But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies..."); in all three the authors likely had in mind a future eschatological (i.e., end-time) event, and perhaps the activities of some antichrist.

Book of Daniel
Chapters 1–6 of the Book of Daniel originated as a collection of oral literature from Hellenistic Palestine in the late 4th to early 3rd centuries BCE. At that time, a lamb was sacrificed twice daily, in the morning and the evening, on the altar of the Temple in Jerusalem. In 167 BCE, Antiochus IV Epiphanes, the Seleucid emperor, who then ruled Palestine, ended the practice. In reaction to this, the visionary chapters of Daniel, chapters 7–12, were added to reassure Jews that they would survive in the face of this threat. In Daniel 8, one angel asks another how long "the transgression that makes desolate" will last. The Prophecy of Seventy Weeks (Daniel 9) tells of "the prince who is to come" who "shall make sacrifice and offering cease, and in their place shall be an abomination that desolates." Daniel's final vision appears in Daniel 11, where it tells the history of the arrogant foreign king who sets up the "abomination that makes desolate,"; and in Daniel 12, where the prophet is told how many days will pass "from the time that the regular burnt offering is taken away and the abomination that desolates is set up."
One of the more popular older views was to see in the "abomination" a contemptuous deformation (or dysphemism) of the Canaanite deity Baalshamin "Lord of Heaven"; Philo of Byblos identified Baalshamin with Zeus, and as the Temple was rededicated in honour of Zeus according to 2 Maccabees 6:2, older commentators tended to follow Porphyry of Tyre in seeing the "abomination" in terms of a statue of Zeus. More recently, it has been suggested that the reference is to baetyls, possibly of meteoric origin, that were fixed to the  altar of sacrifice for worship, since the use of such stones is well-attested in Canaanite and Syrian cults. Both proposals have been criticized on the basis that they are too speculative, dependent on flawed analysis, or not well-suited to the relevant context in the Book of Daniel; and more recent scholarship tends to see the "abomination" as a reference to either the pagan offerings that replaced the forbidden twice-daily Jewish offering (cf. Daniel 11:31, 12:11; 2 Maccabees 6:5), or the pagan altar on which such offerings were made.

New Testament
In 63 BCE, the Romans captured Jerusalem, and Judaea became a province of the Roman Empire. In 66 CE, the Jews rose in revolt in the First Jewish–Roman War. The war ended in 70 CE when the legions of the Roman general Titus surrounded and eventually captured Jerusalem; the city and the Temple were razed to the ground, and the only habitation on the site until the first third of the next century was a castrum. It was against this background that the gospels were written; the Gospel of Mark around 70 and Matthew and Luke around 80–85. The secular scholars believe that  none of the authors were eyewitnesses to the life of Jesus, and that Mark was the source used by the authors of Matthew and Luke for their "abomination of desolation" passages.
Chapter 13 of the Gospel of Mark is a speech of Jesus concerning the return of the son of man and the advent of the Kingdom of God, which will be signalled by the appearance of the "abomination of desolation". It begins with Jesus in the temple informing his disciples that "not one stone here will be left on another, all will be thrown down"; the disciples ask when this will happen, and in Mark 13:15, Jesus tells them: "[W]hen you see the abomination of desolation standing where he ought not to be (let the reader understand), then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains" Mark's terminology is drawn from Daniel, but the author places the fulfilment of the prophecy in the coming days, underlining this in Mark 13:30 by stating that "this generation will not pass away before all these things take place." While Daniel's "abomination" was probably a pagan altar or sacrifice, Mark uses a masculine participle for "standing", indicating a concrete historical person: several candidates have been suggested, but the most likely is Titus.
The majority of scholars believe that Mark was the source used by the authors of Matthew and Luke for their "abomination of desolation" passages. Matthew 24:15–16 follows Mark 13:14 closely: "So when you see the abomination of desolation spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand), then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains"; but unlike Mark, Matthew uses a neutral participle instead of a masculine one, and explicitly identifies Daniel as the text's prophetic source. Luke 21:20–21 drops the "abomination" entirely: "But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation has come near. Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, and let those who are inside the city depart, and let not those who are out in the country enter it." In all three, the authors likely had in mind a future eschatological (i.e., end-time) event, and perhaps the activities of some antichrist.

Esoteric interpretations
It is an expression found in Matthew 24:15 and Mark 13:14 that refers to an abominable stele of Daniel 8:13, Daniel 9:27, Daniel 11:31 and Daniel 12:11 (see Prophecy of Seventy Weeks).
This expression refers to the transgression of the Law of Moses by the Jews when they were being taken captive to Babylon. The graven image mentioned in the Old Testament is called a stele by ancient peoples, such as the Egyptians, and were usually funerary tablets that pagan peoples made for their gods.
God's people were serving stelae (graven images) and serving other pagan gods such as the queen of heaven in the Babylonian captivity. 
Both the prophets Daniel and Jesus warned the Israelites of their turning away from God and of the End Times, as in the Prophecy of Seventy Weeks, which is prophesied by the angel Gabriel of the coming of the Anti-Messiah, who after the 62 weeks would come to ravage humanity. There is also a meaning in esoteric occult circles, that the stele of Revelation, also known as the stele of Ankh-af-na-Khonsu, would be filled with prophecies of the Anti-Messiah, according to interpretations of the religion developed by Aleister Crowley, called Thelema.
According to the Bible in II Kings 23:13 and I Kings 11:5 one can find a close link between the concepts of idolatry and abomination.
In the circles of direct influence of the Book of Daniel, which are the same circles that gave rise to apocalyptic literature, the expression was used to designate an important eschatological conception. It is only in an eschatological sense that the expression can be adequately explained in the New Testament passages mentioned above.
According to most modern commentators, these passages are a “Jewish apocalypse”, which was reinterpreted by Christianity as a prophecy about the end times, when the Antichrist (abomination of desolation), will come to ravage the Earth and its inhabitants.
On the other hand, W. C. Allen maintains that the evangelists were referring to Caligula's desire to build a statue of himself in the Temple of Jerusalem.

See also
Related Bible sections: Daniel 7, Daniel 8, Daniel 11–12, Matthew 24, Mark 13
Abomination (Judaism)
Apocalypticism
Mount of Temptation
Last Judgment
Great Tribulation

Notes
References

== Bibliography ==

================================================================================

# Climate change

Present-day climate change includes both global warming—the ongoing increase in global average temperature—and its wider effects on Earth's climate system. Climate change in a broader sense also includes previous long-term changes to Earth's climate. The current rise in global temperatures is driven by human activities, especially fossil fuel (coal, oil and natural gas) burning since the Industrial Revolution. Fossil fuel use, deforestation, and some agricultural and industrial practices release greenhouse gases. These gases absorb some of the heat that the Earth radiates after it warms from sunlight, warming the lower atmosphere. Carbon dioxide, the primary gas driving global warming, has increased in concentration by about 50% since the pre-industrial era to levels not seen for millions of years.
Climate change has an increasingly large impact on the environment. Deserts are expanding, while heat waves and wildfires are becoming more common. Amplified warming in the Arctic has contributed to thawing permafrost, retreat of glaciers and sea ice decline. Higher temperatures are also causing more intense storms, droughts, and other weather extremes. Rapid environmental change in mountains, coral reefs, and the Arctic is forcing many species to relocate or become extinct. Even if efforts to minimize future warming are successful, some effects will continue for centuries. These include ocean heating, ocean acidification and sea level rise.
Climate change threatens people with increased flooding, extreme heat, increased food and water scarcity, more disease, and economic loss. Human migration and conflict can also be a result. The World Health Organization calls climate change one of the biggest threats to global health in the 21st century. Societies and ecosystems will experience more severe risks without action to limit warming. Adapting to climate change through efforts like flood control measures or drought-resistant crops partially reduces climate change risks, although some limits to adaptation have already been reached. Poorer communities are responsible for a small share of global emissions, yet have the least ability to adapt and are most vulnerable to climate change.

Many climate change impacts have been observed in the first decades of the 21st century, with 2024 the warmest on record at +1.60 °C (2.88 °F) since regular tracking began in 1850. Additional warming will increase these impacts and can trigger tipping points, such as melting all of the Greenland ice sheet. Under the 2015 Paris Agreement, nations collectively agreed to keep warming "well under 2 °C". However, with pledges made under the Agreement, global warming would still reach about 2.8 °C (5.0 °F) by the end of the century. 
There is widespread support for climate action worldwide, and most countries aim to stop emitting carbon dioxide. Fossil fuels can be phased out by stopping subsidising them, conserving energy and switching to energy sources that do not produce significant carbon pollution. These energy sources include wind, solar, hydro, and nuclear power. Cleanly generated electricity can replace fossil fuels for powering transportation, heating buildings, and running industrial processes. Carbon can also be removed from the atmosphere, for instance by increasing forest cover and farming with methods that store carbon in soil.

Terminology
Before the 1980s, it was unclear whether the warming effect of increased greenhouse gases was stronger than the cooling effect of airborne particulates in air pollution. Scientists used the term inadvertent climate modification to refer to human impacts on the climate at this time. In the 1980s, the terms global warming and climate change became more common, often being used interchangeably. Scientifically, global warming refers only to increased global average surface temperature, while climate change describes both global warming and its effects on Earth's climate system, such as precipitation changes.
Climate change can also be used more broadly to include changes to the climate that have happened throughout Earth's history. Global warming—used as early as 1975—became the more popular term after NASA climate scientist James Hansen used it in his 1988 testimony in the U.S. Senate. Since the 2000s, usage of climate change has increased. Various scientists, politicians and media may use the terms climate crisis or climate emergency to talk about climate change, and may use the term global heating instead of global warming.

Global temperature rise
Temperatures prior to present-day global warming
Over the last few million years the climate cycled through ice ages. One of the hotter periods was the Last Interglacial, around 125,000 years ago, where temperatures were between 0.5 °C and 1.5 °C warmer than before the start of global warming. This period saw sea levels 5 to 10 metres higher than today. The most recent glacial maximum 20,000 years ago was some 5–7 °C colder. This period has sea levels that were over 125 metres (410 ft) lower than today.
Temperatures stabilized in the current interglacial period beginning 11,700 years ago. This period also saw the start of agriculture. Historical patterns of warming and cooling, like the Medieval Warm Period and the Little Ice Age, did not occur at the same time across different regions. Temperatures may have reached as high as those of the late 20th century in a limited set of regions. Climate information for that period comes from climate proxies, such as trees and ice cores.

Warming since the Industrial Revolution
Around 1850 thermometer records began to provide global coverage.
Between the 18th century and 1970 there was little net warming, as the warming impact of greenhouse gas emissions was offset by cooling from sulfur dioxide emissions. Sulfur dioxide causes acid rain, but it also produces sulfate aerosols in the atmosphere, which reflect sunlight and cause global dimming. After 1970, the increasing accumulation of greenhouse gases and controls on sulfur pollution led to a marked increase in temperature.

Ongoing changes in climate have had no precedent for several thousand years. Multiple datasets all show worldwide increases in surface temperature, at a rate of around 0.2 °C per decade. The 2014–2023 decade warmed to an average 1.19 °C [1.06–1.30 °C] compared to the pre-industrial baseline (1850–1900). Not every single year was warmer than the last: internal climate variability processes can make any year 0.2 °C warmer or colder than the average. From 1998 to 2013, negative phases of two such processes, Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) caused a short slower period of warming called the "global warming hiatus". After the "hiatus", the opposite occurred, with 2024 well above the recent average at more than +1.5 °C. This is why the temperature change is defined in terms of a 20-year average, which reduces the noise of hot and cold years and decadal climate patterns, and detects the long-term signal.
A wide range of other observations reinforce the evidence of warming. The upper atmosphere is cooling, because greenhouse gases are trapping heat near the Earth's surface, and so less heat is radiating into space. Warming reduces average snow cover and forces the retreat of glaciers. At the same time, warming also causes greater evaporation from the oceans, leading to more atmospheric humidity, more and heavier precipitation. Plants are flowering earlier in spring, and thousands of animal species have been permanently moving to cooler areas.

Differences by region
Different regions of the world warm at different rates. The pattern is independent of where greenhouse gases are emitted, because the gases persist long enough to diffuse across the planet. Since the pre-industrial period, the average surface temperature over land regions has increased almost twice as fast as the global average surface temperature. This is because oceans lose more heat by evaporation and oceans can store a lot of heat. The thermal energy in the global climate system has grown with only brief pauses since at least 1970, and over 90% of this extra energy has been stored in the ocean. The rest has heated the atmosphere, melted ice, and warmed the continents.
The Northern Hemisphere and the North Pole have warmed much faster than the South Pole and Southern Hemisphere. The Northern Hemisphere not only has much more land, but also more seasonal snow cover and sea ice. As these surfaces flip from reflecting a lot of light to being dark after the ice has melted, they start absorbing more heat. Local black carbon deposits on snow and ice also contribute to Arctic warming. Arctic surface temperatures are increasing between three and four times faster than in the rest of the world. Melting of ice sheets near the poles weakens both the Atlantic and the Antarctic limb of thermohaline circulation, which further changes the distribution of heat and precipitation around the globe.

Future global temperatures
The World Meteorological Organization estimates there is almost a 50% chance of the five-year average global temperature exceeding +1.5 °C between 2024 and 2028. The IPCC expects the 20-year average to exceed +1.5 °C in the early 2030s.
The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (2021) included projections that by 2100 global warming is very likely to reach 1.0–1.8 °C under a scenario with very low emissions of greenhouse gases, 2.1–3.5 °C under an intermediate emissions scenario,
or 3.3–5.7 °C under a very high emissions scenario. The warming will continue past 2100 in the intermediate and high emission scenarios, with future projections of global surface temperatures by year 2300 being similar to millions of years ago.
The remaining carbon budget for staying beneath certain temperature increases is determined by modelling the carbon cycle and climate sensitivity to greenhouse gases. According to UNEP, global warming can be kept below 2.0 °C with a 50% chance if emissions after 2023 do not exceed 900 gigatonnes of CO2. This carbon budget corresponds to around 16 years of current emissions.

Causes of recent global temperature rise
The climate system experiences various cycles on its own which can last for years, decades or even centuries. For example, El Niño events cause short-term spikes in surface temperature while La Niña events cause short term cooling. Their relative frequency can affect global temperature trends on a decadal timescale. Other changes are caused by an imbalance of energy from external forcings. Examples of these include changes in the concentrations of greenhouse gases, solar luminosity, volcanic eruptions, and variations in the Earth's orbit around the Sun.
To determine the human contribution to climate change, unique "fingerprints" for all potential causes are developed and compared with both observed patterns and known internal climate variability. For example, solar forcing—whose fingerprint involves warming the entire atmosphere—is ruled out because only the lower atmosphere has warmed. Atmospheric aerosols produce a smaller, cooling effect. Other drivers, such as changes in albedo, are less impactful.

Greenhouse gases
Greenhouse gases are transparent to sunlight, and thus allow it to pass through the atmosphere to heat the Earth's surface. The Earth radiates it as heat, and greenhouse gases absorb a portion of it. This absorption slows the rate at which heat escapes into space, trapping heat near the Earth's surface and warming it over time.
While water vapour (≈50%) and clouds (≈25%) are the biggest contributors to the greenhouse effect, they primarily change as a function of temperature and are therefore mostly considered to be feedbacks that change climate sensitivity. On the other hand, concentrations of gases such as CO2 (≈20%), tropospheric ozone, CFCs and nitrous oxide are added or removed independently from temperature, and are therefore considered to be external forcings that change global temperatures.
Before the Industrial Revolution, naturally occurring amounts of greenhouse gases caused the air near the surface to be about 33 °C warmer than it would have been in their absence. Human activity since the Industrial Revolution, mainly extracting and burning fossil fuels (coal, oil, and natural gas), has increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. In 2022, the concentrations of CO2 and methane had increased by about 50% and 164%, respectively, since 1750. These CO2 levels are higher than they have been at any time during the last 14 million years. Concentrations of methane are far higher than they were over the last 800,000 years.

Global human-caused greenhouse gas emissions in 2019 were equivalent to 59 billion tonnes of CO2. Of these emissions, 75% was CO2, 18% was methane, 4% was nitrous oxide, and 2% was fluorinated gases. CO2 emissions primarily come from burning fossil fuels to provide energy for transport, manufacturing, heating, and electricity. Additional CO2 emissions come from deforestation and industrial processes, which include the CO2 released by the chemical reactions for making cement, steel, aluminium, and fertilizer. Methane emissions come from livestock, manure, rice cultivation, landfills, wastewater, and coal mining, as well as oil and gas extraction. Nitrous oxide emissions largely come from the microbial decomposition of fertilizer.
While methane only lasts in the atmosphere for an average of 12 years, CO2 lasts much longer. The Earth's surface absorbs CO2 as part of the carbon cycle. While plants on land and in the ocean absorb most excess emissions of CO2 every year, that CO2 is returned to the atmosphere when biological matter is digested, burns, or decays. Land-surface carbon sink processes, such as carbon fixation in the soil and photosynthesis, remove about 29% of annual global CO2 emissions. The ocean has absorbed 20 to 30% of emitted CO2 over the last two decades. CO2 is only removed from the atmosphere for the long term when it is stored in the Earth's crust, which is a process that can take millions of years to complete.

Land surface changes
Around 30% of Earth's land area is largely unusable for humans (glaciers, deserts, etc.), 26% is forests, 10% is shrubland and 34% is agricultural land. Deforestation is the main land use change contributor to global warming, as the destroyed trees release CO2, and are not replaced by new trees, removing that carbon sink. Between 2001 and 2018, 27% of deforestation was from permanent clearing to enable agricultural expansion for crops and livestock. Another 24% has been lost to temporary clearing under the shifting cultivation agricultural systems. 26% was due to logging for wood and derived products, and wildfires have accounted for the remaining 23%. Some forests have not been fully cleared, but were already degraded by these impacts. Restoring these forests also recovers their potential as a carbon sink.
Local vegetation cover impacts how much of the sunlight gets reflected back into space (albedo), and how much heat is lost by evaporation. For instance, the change from a dark forest to grassland makes the surface lighter, causing it to reflect more sunlight. Deforestation can also modify the release of chemical compounds that influence clouds, and by changing wind patterns. In tropic and temperate areas the net effect is to produce significant warming, and forest restoration can make local temperatures cooler. At latitudes closer to the poles, there is a cooling effect as forest is replaced by snow-covered (and more reflective) plains. Globally, these increases in surface albedo have been the dominant direct influence on temperature from land use change. Thus, land use change to date is estimated to have a slight cooling effect.

Other factors
Aerosols and clouds
Air pollution, in the form of aerosols, affects the climate on a large scale. Aerosols scatter and absorb solar radiation. From 1961 to 1990, a gradual reduction in the amount of sunlight reaching the Earth's surface was observed. This phenomenon is popularly known as global dimming, and is primarily attributed to sulfate aerosols produced by the combustion of fossil fuels with heavy sulfur concentrations like coal and bunker fuel. Smaller contributions come from black carbon (from combustion of fossil fuels and biomass), and from dust. Globally, aerosols have been declining since 1990 due to pollution controls, meaning that they no longer mask greenhouse gas warming as much.
Aerosols also have indirect effects on the Earth's energy budget. Sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets. These clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets. They also reduce the growth of raindrops, which makes clouds more reflective to incoming sunlight. Indirect effects of aerosols are the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing.
While aerosols typically limit global warming by reflecting sunlight, black carbon in soot that falls on snow or ice can contribute to global warming. Not only does this increase the absorption of sunlight, it also increases melting and sea-level rise. Limiting new black carbon deposits in the Arctic could reduce global warming by 0.2 °C by 2050. The effect of decreasing sulfur content of fuel oil for ships since 2020 is estimated to cause an additional 0.05 °C increase in global mean temperature by 2050.

Solar and volcanic activity
As the Sun is the Earth's primary energy source, changes in incoming sunlight directly affect the climate system. Solar irradiance has been measured directly by satellites, and indirect measurements are available from the early 1600s onwards. Since 1880, there has been no upward trend in the amount of the Sun's energy reaching the Earth, in contrast to the warming of the lower atmosphere (the troposphere). The upper atmosphere (the stratosphere) would also be warming if the Sun was sending more energy to Earth, but instead, it has been cooling.
This is consistent with greenhouse gases preventing heat from leaving the Earth's atmosphere.
Explosive volcanic eruptions can release gases, dust and ash that partially block sunlight and reduce temperatures, or they can send water vapour into the atmosphere, which adds to greenhouse gases and increases temperatures. These impacts on temperature only last for several years, because both water vapour and volcanic material have low persistence in the atmosphere. volcanic CO2 emissions are more persistent, but they are equivalent to less than 1% of current human-caused CO2 emissions. Volcanic activity still represents the single largest natural impact (forcing) on temperature in the industrial era. Yet, like the other natural forcings, it has had negligible impacts on global temperature trends since the Industrial Revolution.

Climate change feedbacks
The climate system's response to an initial forcing is shaped by feedbacks, which either amplify or dampen the change. Self-reinforcing or positive feedbacks increase the response, while balancing or negative feedbacks reduce it. The main reinforcing feedbacks are the water-vapour feedback, the ice–albedo feedback, and the net cloud feedback. The primary balancing mechanism is radiative cooling, as Earth's surface gives off more heat to space in response to rising temperature. In addition to temperature feedbacks, there are feedbacks in the carbon cycle, such as the fertilizing effect of CO2 on plant growth. Feedbacks are expected to trend in a positive direction as greenhouse gas emissions continue, raising climate sensitivity.
These feedback processes alter the pace of global warming. For instance, warmer air can hold more moisture in the form of water vapour, which is itself a potent greenhouse gas. Warmer air can also make clouds higher and thinner, and therefore more insulating, increasing climate warming. The reduction of snow cover and sea ice in the Arctic is another major feedback, this reduces the reflectivity of the Earth's surface in the region and accelerates Arctic warming. This additional warming also contributes to permafrost thawing, which releases methane and CO2 into the atmosphere.
Around half of human-caused CO2 emissions have been absorbed by land plants and by the oceans. This fraction is not static and if future CO2 emissions decrease, the Earth will be able to absorb up to around 70%. If they increase substantially, it'll still absorb more carbon than now, but the overall fraction will decrease to below 40%. This is because climate change increases droughts and heat waves that eventually inhibit plant growth on land, and soils will release more carbon from dead plants when they are warmer. The rate at which oceans absorb atmospheric carbon will be lowered as they become more acidic and experience changes in thermohaline circulation and phytoplankton distribution. Uncertainty over feedbacks, particularly cloud cover, is the major reason why different climate models project different magnitudes of warming for a given amount of emissions.

Modelling
A climate model is a representation of the physical, chemical and biological processes that affect the climate system. Models include natural processes like changes in the Earth's orbit, historical changes in the Sun's activity, and volcanic forcing. Models are used to estimate the degree of warming future emissions will cause when accounting for the strength of climate feedbacks. Models also predict the circulation of the oceans, the annual cycle of the seasons, and the flows of carbon between the land surface and the atmosphere.
The physical realism of models is tested by examining their ability to simulate current or past climates. Past models have underestimated the rate of Arctic shrinkage and underestimated the rate of precipitation increase. Sea level rise since 1990 was underestimated in older models, but more recent models agree well with observations. The 2017 United States-published National Climate Assessment notes that "climate models may still be underestimating or missing relevant feedback processes". Additionally, climate models may be unable to adequately predict short-term regional climatic shifts.
A subset of climate models add societal factors to a physical climate model. These models simulate how population, economic growth, and energy use affect—and interact with—the physical climate. With this information, these models can produce scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions. This is then used as input for physical climate models and carbon cycle models to predict how atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases might change. Depending on the socioeconomic scenario and the mitigation scenario, models produce atmospheric CO2 concentrations that range widely between 380 and 1400 ppm.

Impacts
Environmental effects
The environmental effects of climate change are broad and far-reaching, affecting oceans, ice, and weather. Changes may occur gradually or rapidly. Evidence for these effects comes from studying climate change in the past, from modelling, and from modern observations. Since the 1950s, droughts and heat waves have appeared simultaneously with increasing frequency. Extremely wet or dry events within the monsoon period have increased in India and East Asia. Monsoonal precipitation over the Northern Hemisphere has increased since 1980. The rainfall rate and intensity of hurricanes and typhoons is likely increasing, and the geographic range likely expanding poleward in response to climate warming. The frequency of tropical cyclones has not increased as a result of climate change.

Global sea level is rising as a consequence of thermal expansion and the melting of glaciers and ice sheets. Sea level rise has increased over time, reaching 4.8 cm per decade between 2014 and 2023. Over the 21st century, the IPCC projects 32–62 cm of sea level rise under a low emission scenario, 44–76 cm under an intermediate one and 65–101 cm under a very high emission scenario. Marine ice sheet instability processes in Antarctica may add substantially to these values, including the possibility of a 2-meter sea level rise by 2100 under high emissions.
Climate change has led to decades of shrinking and thinning of the Arctic sea ice. While ice-free summers are expected to be rare at 1.5 °C degrees of warming, they are set to occur once every three to ten years at a warming level of 2 °C. Higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations cause more CO2 to dissolve in the oceans, which is making them more acidic. Because oxygen is less soluble in warmer water, its concentrations in the ocean are decreasing, and dead zones are expanding.

Tipping points and long-term impacts
Greater degrees of global warming increase the risk of passing through 'tipping points'—thresholds beyond which certain major impacts can no longer be avoided even if temperatures return to their previous state. For instance, the Greenland ice sheet is already melting, but if global warming reaches levels between 1.7 °C and 2.3 °C, its melting will continue until it fully disappears. If the warming is later reduced to 1.5 °C or less, it will still lose a lot more ice than if the warming was never allowed to reach the threshold in the first place. While the ice sheets would melt over millennia, other tipping points would occur faster and give societies less time to respond. The collapse of major ocean currents like the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC), and irreversible damage to key ecosystems like the Amazon rainforest and coral reefs can unfold in a matter of decades. The collapse of the AMOC would be a severe climate catastrophe, resulting in a cooling of the Northern Hemisphere.
The long-term effects of climate change on oceans include further ice melt, ocean warming, sea level rise, ocean acidification and ocean deoxygenation. The timescale of long-term impacts are centuries to millennia due to CO2's long atmospheric lifetime. The result is an estimated total sea level rise of 2.3 metres per degree Celsius (4.2 ft/°F) after 2000 years. Oceanic CO2 uptake is slow enough that ocean acidification will also continue for hundreds to thousands of years. Deep oceans (below 2,000 metres (6,600 ft)) are also already committed to losing over 10% of their dissolved oxygen by the warming which occurred to date. Further, the West Antarctic ice sheet appears committed to practically irreversible melting, which would increase the sea levels by at least 3.3 m (10 ft 10 in) over approximately 2000 years.

Nature and wildlife
Recent warming has driven many terrestrial and freshwater species poleward and towards higher altitudes. For instance, the range of hundreds of North American birds has shifted northward at an average rate of 1.5 km/year over the past 55 years. Higher atmospheric CO2 levels and an extended growing season have resulted in global greening. However, heatwaves and drought have reduced ecosystem productivity in some regions. The future balance of these opposing effects is unclear. A related phenomenon driven by climate change is woody plant encroachment, affecting up to 500 million hectares globally. Climate change has contributed to the expansion of drier climate zones, such as the expansion of deserts in the subtropics. The size and speed of global warming is making abrupt changes in ecosystems more likely. Overall, it is expected that climate change will result in the extinction of many species.
The oceans have heated more slowly than the land, but plants and animals in the ocean have migrated towards the colder poles faster than species on land. Just as on land, heat waves in the ocean occur more frequently due to climate change, harming a wide range of organisms such as corals, kelp, and seabirds. Ocean acidification makes it harder for marine calcifying organisms such as mussels, barnacles and corals to produce shells and skeletons; and heatwaves have bleached coral reefs. Harmful algal blooms enhanced by climate change and eutrophication lower oxygen levels, disrupt food webs and cause great loss of marine life. Coastal ecosystems are under particular stress. Almost half of global wetlands have disappeared due to climate change and other human impacts. Plants have come under increased stress from damage by insects.

Humans
The effects of climate change are impacting humans everywhere in the world. Impacts can be observed on all continents and ocean regions, with low-latitude, less developed areas facing the greatest risk. Continued warming has potentially "severe, pervasive and irreversible impacts" for people and ecosystems. The risks are unevenly distributed, but are generally greater for disadvantaged people in developing and developed countries.

Health and food
The World Health Organization calls climate change one of the biggest threats to global health in the 21st century. Scientists have warned about the irreversible harms it poses. Extreme weather events affect public health, and food and water security. Temperature extremes lead to increased illness and death. Climate change increases the intensity and frequency of extreme weather events. It can affect transmission of infectious diseases, such as dengue fever and malaria. According to the World Economic Forum, 14.5 million more deaths are expected due to climate change by 2050. 30% of the global population currently live in areas where extreme heat and humidity are already associated with excess deaths. By 2100, 50% to 75% of the global population would live in such areas.
While total crop yields have been increasing in the past 50 years due to agricultural improvements, climate change has already decreased the rate of yield growth. Fisheries have been negatively affected in multiple regions. While agricultural productivity has been positively affected in some high latitude areas, mid- and low-latitude areas have been negatively affected. According to the World Economic Forum, an increase in drought in certain regions could cause 3.2 million deaths from malnutrition by 2050 and stunting in children. With 2 °C warming, global livestock headcounts could decline by 7–10% by 2050, as less animal feed will be available. If the emissions continue to increase for the rest of century, then over 9 million climate-related deaths would occur annually by 2100.

Livelihoods and inequality
Economic damages due to climate change may be severe and there is a chance of disastrous consequences. Severe impacts are expected in South-East Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, where most of the local inhabitants are dependent upon natural and agricultural resources. Heat stress can prevent outdoor labourers from working. If warming reaches 4 °C then labour capacity in those regions could be reduced by 30 to 50%. The World Bank estimates that between 2016 and 2030, climate change could drive over 120 million people into extreme poverty without adaptation.
Inequalities based on wealth and social status have worsened due to climate change. Major difficulties in mitigating, adapting to, and recovering from climate shocks are faced by marginalized people who have less control over resources. Indigenous people, who are subsistent on their land and ecosystems, will face endangerment to their wellness and lifestyles due to climate change. An expert elicitation concluded that the role of climate change in armed conflict has been small compared to factors such as socio-economic inequality and state capabilities.
While women are not inherently more at risk from climate change and shocks, limits on women's resources and discriminatory gender norms constrain their adaptive capacity and resilience. For example, women's work burdens, including hours worked in agriculture, tend to decline less than men's during climate shocks such as heat stress.

Climate migration
Low-lying islands and coastal communities are threatened by sea level rise, which makes urban flooding more common. Sometimes, land is permanently lost to the sea. This could lead to statelessness for people in island nations, such as the Maldives and Tuvalu. In some regions, the rise in temperature and humidity may be too severe for humans to adapt to. With worst-case climate change, models project that areas almost one-third of humanity live in might become Sahara-like uninhabitable and extremely hot climates.
These factors can drive climate or environmental migration, within and between countries. More people are expected to be displaced because of sea level rise, extreme weather and conflict from increased competition over natural resources. Climate change may also increase vulnerability, leading to "trapped populations" who are not able to move due to a lack of resources.

Reducing and recapturing emissions
Climate change can be mitigated by reducing the rate at which greenhouse gases are emitted into the atmosphere, and by increasing the rate at which carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere. To limit global warming to less than 2 °C global greenhouse gas emissions need to be net-zero by 2070. This requires far-reaching, systemic changes on an unprecedented scale in energy, land, cities, transport, buildings, and industry.
The United Nations Environment Programme estimates that countries need to triple their pledges under the Paris Agreement within the next decade to limit global warming to 2 °C. With pledges made under the Paris Agreement as of 2024, there would be a 66% chance that global warming is kept under 2.8 °C by the end of the century (range: 1.9–3.7 °C, depending on exact implementation and technological progress). When only considering current policies, this raises to 3.1 °C. Globally, limiting warming to 2 °C may result in higher economic benefits than economic costs.
Although there is no single pathway to limit global warming to 2 °C, most scenarios and strategies see a major increase in the use of renewable energy in combination with increased energy efficiency measures to generate the needed greenhouse gas reductions. To reduce pressures on ecosystems and enhance their carbon sequestration capabilities, changes would also be necessary in agriculture and forestry, such as preventing deforestation and restoring natural ecosystems by reforestation.
Other approaches to mitigating climate change have a higher level of risk. Scenarios that limit global warming to 1.5 °C typically project the large-scale use of carbon dioxide removal methods over the 21st century. There are concerns, though, about over-reliance on these technologies, and environmental impacts. 
Solar radiation modification (SRM) is a proposal for reducing global warming by reflecting some sunlight away from Earth and back into space. Because it does not reduce greenhouse gas concentrations, it would not address ocean acidification and is not considered mitigation. SRM should be considered only as a supplement to mitigation, not a replacement for it,  due to risks such as rapid warming if it were abruptly stopped and not restarted. The most-studied approach is stratospheric aerosol injection. SRM could reduce global warming and some of its impacts, though imperfectly. It poses environmental risks, such as changes to rainfall patterns, as well as political challenges, such as who would decide whether to use it.

Clean energy
Renewable energy is key to limiting climate change. For decades, fossil fuels have accounted for roughly 80% of the world's energy use. The remaining share has been split between nuclear power and renewables (including hydropower, bioenergy, wind and solar power and geothermal energy). Fossil fuel use is expected to peak in absolute terms prior to 2030 and then to decline, with coal use experiencing the sharpest reductions. Renewables represented 86% of all new electricity generation installed in 2023. Other forms of clean energy, such as nuclear and hydropower, currently have a larger share of the energy supply. However, their future growth forecasts appear limited in comparison.
While solar panels and onshore wind are now among the cheapest forms of adding new power generation capacity in many locations, green energy policies are needed to achieve a rapid transition from fossil fuels to renewables. To achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, renewable energy would become the dominant form of electricity generation, rising to 85% or more by 2050 in some scenarios. Investment in coal would be eliminated and coal use nearly phased out by 2050.
Electricity generated from renewable sources would also need to become the main energy source for heating and transport. Transport can switch away from internal combustion engine vehicles and towards electric vehicles, public transit, and active transport (cycling and walking). For shipping and flying, low-carbon fuels would reduce emissions. Heating could be increasingly decarbonized with technologies like heat pumps.
There are obstacles to the continued rapid growth of clean energy, including renewables. Wind and solar produce energy intermittently and with seasonal variability. Traditionally, hydro dams with reservoirs and fossil fuel power plants have been used when variable energy production is low. Going forward, battery storage can be expanded, energy demand and supply can be matched, and long-distance transmission can smooth variability of renewable outputs. Bioenergy is often not carbon-neutral and may have negative consequences for food security. The growth of nuclear power is constrained by controversy around radioactive waste, nuclear weapon proliferation, and accidents. Hydropower growth is limited by the fact that the best sites have been developed, and new projects are confronting increased social and environmental concerns.
Low-carbon energy improves human health by minimizing climate change as well as reducing air pollution deaths, which were estimated at 7 million annually in 2016. Meeting the Paris Agreement goals that limit warming to a 2 °C increase could save about a million of those lives per year by 2050, whereas limiting global warming to 1.5 °C could save millions and simultaneously increase energy security and reduce poverty. Improving air quality also has economic benefits which may be larger than mitigation costs.

Energy conservation
Reducing energy demand is another major aspect of reducing emissions. If less energy is needed, there is more flexibility for clean energy development. It also makes it easier to manage the electricity grid, and minimizes carbon-intensive infrastructure development. Major increases in energy efficiency investment will be required to achieve climate goals, comparable to the level of investment in renewable energy. Several COVID-19 related changes in energy use patterns, energy efficiency investments, and funding have made forecasts for this decade more difficult and uncertain.
Strategies to reduce energy demand vary by sector. In the transport sector, passengers and freight can switch to more efficient travel modes, such as buses and trains, or use electric vehicles. Industrial strategies to reduce energy demand include improving heating systems and motors, designing less energy-intensive products, and increasing product lifetimes. In the building sector the focus is on better design of new buildings, and higher levels of energy efficiency in retrofitting. The use of technologies like heat pumps can also increase building energy efficiency.

Agriculture and industry
Agriculture and forestry face a triple challenge of limiting greenhouse gas emissions, preventing the further conversion of forests to agricultural land, and meeting increases in world food demand. A set of actions could reduce agriculture and forestry-based emissions by two-thirds from 2010 levels. These include reducing growth in demand for food and other agricultural products, increasing land productivity, protecting and restoring forests, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural production.
On the demand side, a key component of reducing emissions is shifting people towards plant-based diets. Eliminating the production of livestock for meat and dairy would eliminate about 3/4ths of all emissions from agriculture and other land use. Livestock also occupy 37% of ice-free land area on Earth and consume feed from the 12% of land area used for crops, driving deforestation and land degradation.
Steel and cement production are responsible for about 13% of industrial CO2 emissions. In these industries, carbon-intensive materials such as coke and lime play an integral role in the production, so that reducing CO2 emissions requires research into alternative chemistries. Where energy production or CO2-intensive heavy industries continue to produce waste CO2, technology can sometimes be used to capture and store most of the gas instead of releasing it to the atmosphere. This technology, carbon capture and storage (CCS), could have a critical but limited role in reducing emissions. It is relatively expensive and has been deployed only to an extent that removes around 0.1% of annual greenhouse gas emissions.

Carbon dioxide removal
Natural carbon sinks can be enhanced to sequester significantly larger amounts of CO2 beyond naturally occurring levels. Reforestation and afforestation (planting forests where there were none before) are among the most mature sequestration techniques, although the latter raises food security concerns. Farmers can promote sequestration of carbon in soils through practices such as use of winter cover crops, reducing the intensity and frequency of tillage, and using compost and manure as soil amendments. Forest and landscape restoration yields many benefits for the climate, including greenhouse gas emissions sequestration and reduction. Restoration/recreation of coastal wetlands, prairie plots and seagrass meadows increases the uptake of carbon into organic matter. When carbon is sequestered in soils and in organic matter such as trees, there is a risk of the carbon being re-released into the atmosphere later through changes in land use, fire, or other changes in ecosystems. 
The use of bioenergy in conjunction with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) can result in net negative emissions as CO2 is drawn from the atmosphere. It remains highly uncertain whether carbon dioxide removal techniques will be able to play a large role in limiting warming to 1.5 °C. Policy decisions that rely on carbon dioxide removal increase the risk of global warming rising beyond international goals.

Adaptation
Adaptation is "the process of adjustment to current or expected changes in climate and its effects". Without additional mitigation, adaptation cannot avert the risk of "severe, widespread and irreversible" impacts. More severe climate change requires more transformative adaptation, which can be prohibitively expensive. The capacity and potential for humans to adapt is unevenly distributed across different regions and populations, and developing countries generally have less. The first two decades of the 21st century saw an increase in adaptive capacity in most low- and middle-income countries with improved access to basic sanitation and electricity, but progress is slow. Many countries have implemented adaptation policies. However, there is a considerable gap between necessary and available finance.
Adaptation to sea level rise consists of avoiding at-risk areas, learning to live with increased flooding, and building flood controls. If that fails, managed retreat may be needed. There are economic barriers for tackling dangerous heat impact. Avoiding strenuous work or having air conditioning is not possible for everybody. In agriculture, adaptation options include a switch to more sustainable diets, diversification, erosion control, and genetic improvements for increased tolerance to a changing climate. Insurance allows for risk-sharing, but is often difficult to get for people on lower incomes. Education, migration and early warning systems can reduce climate vulnerability. Planting mangroves or encouraging other coastal vegetation can buffer storms.
Ecosystems adapt to climate change, a process that can be supported by human intervention. By increasing connectivity between ecosystems, species can migrate to more favourable climate conditions. Species can also be introduced to areas acquiring a favourable climate. Protection and restoration of natural and semi-natural areas helps build resilience, making it easier for ecosystems to adapt. Many of the actions that promote adaptation in ecosystems, also help humans adapt via ecosystem-based adaptation. For instance, restoration of natural fire regimes makes catastrophic fires less likely, and reduces human exposure. Giving rivers more space allows for more water storage in the natural system, reducing flood risk. Restored forest acts as a carbon sink, but planting trees in unsuitable regions can exacerbate climate impacts.
There are synergies but also trade-offs between adaptation and mitigation. An example for synergy is increased food productivity, which has large benefits for both adaptation and mitigation. An example of a trade-off is that increased use of air conditioning allows people to better cope with heat, but increases energy demand. Another trade-off example is that more compact urban development may reduce emissions from transport and construction, but may also increase the urban heat island effect, exposing people to heat-related health risks.

Policies and politics
Countries that are most vulnerable to climate change have typically been responsible for a small share of global emissions. This raises questions about justice and fairness. Limiting global warming makes it much easier to achieve the UN's Sustainable Development Goals, such as eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities. The connection is recognized in Sustainable Development Goal 13 which is to "take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts". The goals on food, clean water and ecosystem protection have synergies with climate mitigation.
The geopolitics of climate change is complex. It has often been framed as a free-rider problem, in which all countries benefit from mitigation done by other countries, but individual countries would lose from switching to a low-carbon economy themselves. Sometimes mitigation also has localized benefits though. For instance, the benefits of a coal phase-out to public health and local environments exceed the costs in almost all regions. Furthermore, net importers of fossil fuels win economically from switching to clean energy, causing net exporters to face stranded assets: fossil fuels they cannot sell.

Policy options
A wide range of policies, regulations, and laws are being used to reduce emissions. As of 2019, carbon pricing covers about 20% of global greenhouse gas emissions. Carbon can be priced with carbon taxes and emissions trading systems. Direct global fossil fuel subsidies reached $319 billion in 2017, and $5.2 trillion when indirect costs such as air pollution are priced in. Ending these can cause a 28% reduction in global carbon emissions and a 46% reduction in air pollution deaths. Money saved on fossil subsidies could be used to support the transition to clean energy instead. More direct methods to reduce greenhouse gases include vehicle efficiency standards, renewable fuel standards, and air pollution regulations on heavy industry. Several countries require utilities to increase the share of renewables in power production.

Climate justice
Policy designed through the lens of climate justice tries to address human rights issues and social inequality. According to proponents of climate justice, the costs of climate adaptation should be paid by those most responsible for climate change, while the beneficiaries of payments should be those suffering impacts. One way this can be addressed in practice is to have wealthy nations pay poorer countries to adapt.
Oxfam found that in 2023 the wealthiest 10% of people were responsible for 50% of global emissions, while the bottom 50% were responsible for just 8%. Production of emissions is another way to look at responsibility: under that approach, the top 21 fossil fuel companies would owe cumulative climate reparations of $5.4 trillion over the period 2025–2050. To achieve a just transition, people working in the fossil fuel sector would also need other jobs, and their communities would need investments.

International climate agreements
Nearly all countries in the world are parties to the 1994 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The goal of the UNFCCC is to prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system. As stated in the convention, this requires that greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilized in the atmosphere at a level where ecosystems can adapt naturally to climate change, food production is not threatened, and economic development can be sustained. The UNFCCC does not itself restrict emissions but rather provides a framework for protocols that do. Global emissions have risen since the UNFCCC was signed. Its yearly conferences are the stage of global negotiations.
The 1997 Kyoto Protocol extended the UNFCCC and included legally binding commitments for most developed countries to limit their emissions. During the negotiations, the G77 (representing developing countries) pushed for a mandate requiring developed countries to "[take] the lead" in reducing their emissions, since developed countries contributed most to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Per-capita emissions were also still relatively low in developing countries and developing countries would need to emit more to meet their development needs.
The 2009 Copenhagen Accord has been widely portrayed as disappointing because of its low goals, and was rejected by poorer nations including the G77. Associated parties aimed to limit the global temperature rise to below 2 °C.  The accord set the goal of sending $100 billion per year to developing countries for mitigation and adaptation by 2020, and proposed the founding of the Green Climate Fund. As of 2020, only 83.3 billion were delivered. Only in 2023 the target is expected to be achieved.
In 2015 all UN countries negotiated the Paris Agreement, which aims to keep global warming well below 2.0 °C and contains an aspirational goal of keeping warming under 1.5 °C. The agreement replaced the Kyoto Protocol. Unlike Kyoto, no binding emission targets were set in the Paris Agreement. Instead, a set of procedures was made binding. Countries have to regularly set ever more ambitious goals and reevaluate these goals every five years. The Paris Agreement restated that developing countries must be financially supported. As of March 2025, 194 states and the European Union have acceded to or ratified the agreement.
The 1987 Montreal Protocol, an international agreement to phase out production of ozone-depleting gases, has had benefits for climate change mitigation. Several ozone-depleting gases like chlorofluorocarbons are powerful greenhouse gases, so banning their production and usage may have avoided a temperature rise of 0.5 °C–1.0 °C, as well as additional warming by preventing damage to vegetation from ultraviolet radiation. It is estimated that the agreement has been more effective at curbing greenhouse gas emissions than the Kyoto Protocol specifically designed to do so. The most recent amendment to the Montreal Protocol, the 2016 Kigali Amendment, committed to reducing the emissions of hydrofluorocarbons, which served as a replacement for banned ozone-depleting gases and are also potent greenhouse gases. Should countries comply with the amendment, a warming of 0.3 °C–0.5 °C is estimated to be avoided.

National responses
In 2019, the United Kingdom parliament became the first national government to declare a climate emergency. Other countries and jurisdictions followed suit. That same year, the European Parliament declared a "climate and environmental emergency". The European Commission presented its European Green Deal with the goal of making the EU carbon-neutral by 2050. In 2021, the European Commission released its "Fit for 55" legislation package, which contains guidelines for the car industry; all new cars on the European market must be zero-emission vehicles from 2035.
Major countries in Asia have made similar pledges: South Korea and Japan have committed to become carbon-neutral by 2050, and China by 2060. While India has strong incentives for renewables, it also plans a significant expansion of coal in the country. Vietnam is among very few coal-dependent, fast-developing countries that pledged to phase out unabated coal power by the 2040s or as soon as possible thereafter.
As of 2021, based on information from 48 national climate plans, which represent 40% of the parties to the Paris Agreement, estimated total greenhouse gas emissions will be 0.5% lower compared to 2010 levels, below the 45% or 25% reduction goals to limit global warming to 1.5 °C or 2 °C, respectively.

Society and culture
Denial and misinformation
Public debate about climate change has been strongly affected by climate change denial and misinformation, which originated in the United States and has since spread to other countries, particularly Canada and Australia. Climate change denial has originated from fossil fuel companies, industry groups, conservative think tanks, and contrarian scientists. Like the tobacco industry, the main strategy of these groups has been to manufacture doubt about climate-change related scientific data and results. People who hold unwarranted doubt about climate change are called climate change "skeptics", although "contrarians" or "deniers" are more appropriate terms.
There are different variants of climate denial: some deny that warming takes place at all, some acknowledge warming but attribute it to natural influences, and some minimize the negative impacts of climate change. Manufacturing uncertainty about the science later developed into a manufactured controversy: creating the belief that there is significant uncertainty about climate change within the scientific community to delay policy changes. Strategies to promote these ideas include criticism of scientific institutions, and questioning the motives of individual scientists. An echo chamber of climate-denying blogs and media has further fomented misunderstanding of climate change.

Public awareness and opinion
Climate change came to international public attention in the late 1980s. Due to media coverage in the early 1990s, people often confused climate change with other environmental issues like ozone depletion. In popular culture, the climate fiction movie The Day After Tomorrow (2004) and the Al Gore documentary An Inconvenient Truth (2006) focused on climate change.
Significant regional, gender, age and political differences exist in both public concern for, and understanding of, climate change. More highly educated people, and in some countries, women and younger people, were more likely to see climate change as a serious threat. College biology textbooks from the 2010s featured less content on climate change compared to those from the preceding decade, with decreasing emphasis on solutions. Partisan gaps also exist in many countries, and countries with high CO2 emissions tend to be less concerned. Views on causes of climate change vary widely between countries. Media coverage linked to protests has had impacts on public sentiment as well as on which aspects of climate change are focused upon. Higher levels of worry are associated with stronger public support for policies that address climate change. Concern has increased over time, and in 2021 a majority of citizens in 30 countries expressed a high level of worry about climate change, or view it as a global emergency. A 2024 survey across 125 countries found that 89% of the global population demanded intensified political action, but systematically underestimated other peoples' willingness to act.

Climate movement
Climate protests demand that political leaders take action to prevent climate change. They can take the form of public demonstrations, fossil fuel divestment, lawsuits and other activities. Prominent demonstrations include the School Strike for Climate. In this initiative, young people across the globe have been protesting since 2018 by skipping school on Fridays, inspired by Swedish activist and then-teenager Greta Thunberg. Mass civil disobedience actions by groups like Extinction Rebellion have protested by disrupting roads and public transport.
Litigation is increasingly used as a tool to strengthen climate action from public institutions and companies. Activists also initiate lawsuits which target governments and demand that they take ambitious action or enforce existing laws on climate change. Lawsuits against fossil-fuel companies generally seek compensation for loss and damage. On 23 July 2025, the UN's International Court of Justice issued its advisory opinion, saying explicitly that states must act to stop climate change, and if they fail to accomplish that duty, other states can sue them. This obligation includes implementing their commitments in international agreements they are parties to, such as the 2015 Paris Climate Accord.

History
Early discoveries
Scientists in the 19th century such as Alexander von Humboldt began to foresee the effects of climate change. In the 1820s, Joseph Fourier proposed the greenhouse effect to explain why Earth's temperature was higher than the Sun's energy alone could explain. Earth's atmosphere is transparent to sunlight, so sunlight reaches the surface where it is converted to heat. However, the atmosphere is not transparent to heat radiating from the surface, and captures some of that heat, which in turn warms the planet.
In 1856 Eunice Newton Foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the Sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air, and that the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide (CO2). In "Circumstances Affecting the Heat of the Sun's Rays" she concluded that "[a]n atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature".

Starting in 1859, John Tyndall established that nitrogen and oxygen—together totalling 99% of dry air—are transparent to radiated heat. However, water vapour and gases such as methane and carbon dioxide absorb radiated heat and re-radiate that heat into the atmosphere. Tyndall proposed that changes in the concentrations of these gases may have caused climatic changes in the past, including ice ages.
Svante Arrhenius noted that water vapour in air continuously varied, but the CO2 concentration in air was influenced by long-term geological processes. Warming from increased CO2 levels would increase the amount of water vapour, amplifying warming in a positive feedback loop. In 1896, he published the first climate model of its kind, projecting that halving CO2 levels could have produced a drop in temperature initiating an ice age. Arrhenius calculated the temperature increase expected from doubling CO2 to be around 5–6 °C. Other scientists were initially sceptical and believed that the greenhouse effect was saturated so that adding more CO2 would make no difference, and that the climate would be self-regulating. Beginning in 1938, Guy Stewart Callendar published evidence that climate was warming and CO2 levels were rising, but his calculations met the same objections.

Development of a scientific consensus
In the 1950s, Gilbert Plass created a detailed computer model that included different atmospheric layers and the infrared spectrum. This model predicted that increasing CO2 levels would cause warming. Around the same time, Hans Suess found evidence that CO2 levels had been rising, and Roger Revelle showed that the oceans would not absorb the increase. The two scientists subsequently helped Charles Keeling to begin a record of continued increase—the "Keeling Curve"—which was part of continued scientific investigation through the 1960s into possible human causation of global warming. Studies such as the National Research Council's 1979 Charney Report supported the accuracy of climate models that forecast significant warming. Human causation of observed global warming and dangers of unmitigated warming were publicly presented in James Hansen's 1988 testimony before a US Senate committee. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), set up in 1988 to provide formal advice to the world's governments, spurred interdisciplinary research. As part of the IPCC reports, scientists assess the scientific discussion that takes place in peer-reviewed journal articles.
There is a nearly unanimous scientific consensus that the climate is warming and that this is caused by human activities. No scientific body of national or international standing disagrees with this view. As of 2019, agreement in recent literature reached over 99%.  The 2021 IPCC Assessment Report stated that it is "unequivocal" that climate change is caused by humans. Consensus has further developed that action should be taken to protect people against the impacts of climate change. National science academies have called on world leaders to cut global emissions.

Recent developments
Extreme event attribution (EEA), also known as attribution science, was developed in the early decades of the 21st century. EEA uses climate models to identify and quantify the role that human-caused climate change plays in the frequency, intensity, duration, and impacts of specific individual extreme weather events. Results of attribution studies allow scientists and journalists to make statements such as, "this weather event was made at least n times more likely by human-caused climate change" or "this heatwave was made m degrees hotter than it would have been in a world without global warming" or "this event was effectively impossible without climate change". Greater computing power in the 2000s and conceptual breakthroughs in the early to mid 2010s  enabled attribution science to detect the effects of climate change on some events with high confidence. Scientists use attribution methods and climate simulations that have already been peer reviewed, allowing "rapid attribution studies" to be published within a "news cycle" time frame after weather events.

References
Sources
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0. Text taken from The status of women in agrifood systems – Overview​, FAO, FAO.

IPCC reports
Other peer-reviewed sources
Books, reports and legal documents
Non-technical sources
External links

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: IPCC (IPCC)
UN: Climate Change (UN)
Met Office: Climate Guide (Met Office)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: Climate (NOAA)
Royal Society. Climate change: Evidence and causes (Royal Society)

================================================================================

# Acid rain

Acid rain is rain or any other form of precipitation that is unusually acidic, meaning that it has elevated levels of hydrogen ions (low pH). Most water, including drinking water, has a neutral pH that exists between 6.5 and 8.5, but acid rain has a pH level lower than this and ranges from 4–5 on average. The more acidic the acid rain is, the lower its pH is. Acid rain can have harmful effects on plants, aquatic animals, and infrastructure. Acid rain is caused by emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide, which react with the water molecules in the atmosphere to produce acids.
Acid rain has been shown to have adverse impacts on forests, freshwaters, soils, microbes, insects and aquatic life-forms. In ecosystems, persistent acid rain reduces tree bark durability, leaving flora more susceptible to environmental stressors such as drought, heat/cold and pest infestation. Acid rain is also capable of detrimenting soil composition by stripping it of nutrients such as calcium and magnesium which play a role in plant growth and maintaining healthy soil. In terms of human infrastructure, acid rain also causes paint to peel, corrosion of steel structures such as bridges, and weathering of stone buildings and statues as well as having impacts on human health.
Some governments, including those in Europe and North America, have made efforts since the 1970s to reduce the release of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide into the atmosphere through air pollution regulations. These efforts have had positive results due to the widespread research on acid rain starting in the 1960s and the publicized information on its harmful effects. The main source of sulfur and nitrogen compounds that result in acid rain are anthropogenic, but nitrogen oxides can also be produced naturally by lightning strikes and sulfur dioxide is produced by volcanic eruptions.

Definition
"Acid rain" is rain with a pH less than 5. "Clean" or unpolluted rain has a pH greater than 5 but still less than pH = 7 owing to the acidity caused by carbon dioxide acid according to the following reactions:

H2O + CO2  ⇌  H2CO3
H2O  + H2CO3  ⇌  HCO−3 + H3O+
A variety of natural and human-made sources contribute to the acidity. For example nitric acid produced by electric discharge in the atmosphere such as lightning. The usual anthropogenic sources are sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide.  They react with water (as does carbon dioxide) to give solutions with pH < 5. Occasional pH readings in rain and fog water of well below 2.4 have been reported in industrialized areas.

History
Acid rain was first systematically studied in Europe in the 1960s, in the United States and Canada in 1970s, and in India in the late 1980s.

In Europe
The corrosive effect of polluted, acidic city air on limestone and marble was noted in the 17th century by John Evelyn, who remarked upon the poor condition of the Arundel marbles.
Since the Industrial Revolution, emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides into the atmosphere have increased. In 1852, Robert Angus Smith was the first to show the relationship between acid rain and atmospheric pollution in Manchester, England. Smith coined the term "acid rain" in 1872.
In the late 1960s, scientists began widely observing and studying the phenomenon. At first, the main focus in this research lay on local effects of acid rain. Waldemar Christofer Brøgger was the first to acknowledge long-distance transportation of pollutants crossing borders from the United Kingdom to Norway – a problem systematically studied by Brynjulf Ottar in the 1970s. Ottar's work was strongly influenced by Swedish soil scientist Svante Odén, who had drawn widespread attention to Europe's acid rain problem in popular newspapers and wrote a landmark paper on the subject in 1968.

In the United States
The earliest report about acid rain in the United States came from chemical evidence gathered from Hubbard Brook Valley; public awareness of acid rain in the US increased in the 1970s after The New York Times reported on these findings.
In 1972, a group of scientists, including Gene Likens, discovered the rain that was deposited at White Mountains of New Hampshire was acidic. The pH of the sample was measured to be 4.03 at Hubbard Brook. The Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study followed up with a series of research studies that analyzed the environmental effects of acid rain. The alumina from soils neutralized acid rain that mixed with stream water at Hubbard Brook. The result of this research indicated that the chemical reaction between acid rain and aluminium leads to an increasing rate of soil weathering. Experimental research examined the effects of increased acidity in streams on ecological species. In 1980, scientists modified the acidity of Norris Brook, New Hampshire, and observed the change in species' behaviors. There was a decrease in species diversity, an increase in community dominants, and a reduction in the food web complexity.
In 1980, the US Congress passed an Acid Deposition Act. This Act established an 18-year assessment and research program under the direction of the National Acidic Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP). NAPAP enlarged a network of monitoring sites to determine how acidic precipitation was, seeking to determine long-term trends, and established a network for dry deposition. Using a statistically based sampling design, NAPAP quantified the effects of acid rain on a regional basis by targeting research and surveys to identify and quantify the impact of acid precipitation on freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems. NAPAP also assessed the effects of acid rain on historical buildings, monuments, and building materials. It also funded extensive studies on atmospheric processes and potential control programs.
From the start, policy advocates from all sides attempted to influence NAPAP activities to support their particular policy advocacy efforts, or to disparage those of their opponents. For the US Government's scientific enterprise, a significant impact of NAPAP were lessons learned in the assessment process and in environmental research management to a relatively large group of scientists, program managers, and the public.
In 1981, the National Academy of Sciences was looking into research about the controversial issues regarding acid rain. President Ronald Reagan dismissed the issues of acid rain until his personal visit to Canada and confirmed that the Canadian border suffered from the drifting pollution from smokestacks originating in the US Midwest. Reagan honored the agreement to Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau's enforcement of anti-pollution regulation. In 1982, Reagan commissioned William Nierenberg to serve on the National Science Board. Nierenberg selected scientists including Gene Likens to serve on a panel to draft a report on acid rain. In 1983, the panel of scientists came up with a draft report, which concluded that acid rain is a real problem and solutions should be sought. White House Office of Science and Technology Policy reviewed the draft report and sent Fred Singer's suggestions of the report, which cast doubt on the cause of acid rain. The panelists revealed rejections against Singer's positions and submitted the report to Nierenberg in April. In May 1983, the House of Representatives voted against legislation controlling sulfur emissions. There was a debate about whether Nierenberg delayed the release of the report. Nierenberg denied the saying about his suppression of the report and stated that it was withheld after the House's vote because it was not ready to be published.
In 1991, the US National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP) provided its first assessment of acid rain in the United States. It reported that 5% of New England Lakes were acidic, with sulfates being the most common problem. They noted that 2% of the lakes could no longer support Brook Trout, and 6% of the lakes were unsuitable for the survival of many minnow species. Subsequent Reports to Congress have documented chemical changes in soil and freshwater ecosystems, nitrogen saturation, soil nutrient decreases, episodic acidification, regional haze, and damage to historical monuments.
Meanwhile, in 1990, the US Congress passed a series of amendments to the Clean Air Act. Title IV of these amendments established a cap and trade system designed to control emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. Both these emissions proved to cause a significant problem for U.S. citizens and their access to healthy, clean air. Title IV called for a total reduction of about 10 million tons of SO2 emissions from power plants, close to a 50% reduction. It was implemented in two phases. Phase I began in 1995 and limited sulfur dioxide emissions from 110 of the largest power plants to 8.7 million tons of sulfur dioxide. One power plant in New England (Merrimack) was in Phase I. Four other plants (Newington, Mount Tom, Brayton Point, and Salem Harbor) were added under other program provisions. Phase II began in 2000 and affects most of the power plants in the country.
During the 1990s, research continued. On March 10, 2005, the EPA issued the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR). This rule provides states with a solution to the problem of power plant pollution that drifts from one state to another. CAIR will permanently cap emissions of SO2 and NOx in the eastern United States. When fully implemented, CAIR will reduce SO2 emissions in 28 eastern states and the District of Columbia by over 70% and NOx emissions by over 60% from 2003 levels.
Overall, the program's cap and trade program has been successful in achieving its goals. Since the 1990s, SO2 emissions have dropped 40%, and according to the Pacific Research Institute, acid rain levels have dropped 65% since 1976. Conventional regulation was used in the European Union, which saw a decrease of over 70% in SO2 emissions during the same period.
In 2007, total SO2 emissions were 8.9 million tons, achieving the program's long-term goal ahead of the 2010 statutory deadline.
In 2007 the EPA estimated that by 2010, the overall costs of complying with the program for businesses and consumers would be $1 billion to $2 billion a year, only one-fourth of what was initially predicted. Forbes says: "In 2010, by which time the cap and trade system had been augmented by the George W. Bush administration's Clean Air Interstate Rule, SO2 emissions had fallen to 5.1 million tons."
The term citizen science can be traced back as far as January 1989 to a campaign by the Audubon Society to measure acid rain. Scientist Muki Haklay cites in a policy report for the Wilson Center entitled 'Citizen Science and Policy: A European Perspective' a first use of the term 'citizen science' by R. Kerson in the magazine MIT Technology Review from January 1989. Quoting from the Wilson Center report: "The new form of engagement in science received the name "citizen science". The first recorded example of using the term is from 1989, describing how 225 volunteers across the US collected rain samples to assist the Audubon Society in an acid-rain awareness-raising campaign. The volunteers collected samples, checked for acidity, and reported to the organization. The information was then used to demonstrate the full extent of the phenomenon."

In Canada
Canadian Harold Harvey was among the first to research a "dead" lake. In 1971, he and R. J. Beamish published a report, "Acidification of the La Cloche Mountain Lakes", documenting the gradual deterioration of fish stocks in 60 lakes in Killarney Park in Ontario, which they had been studying systematically since 1966.
In the 1970s and 80s, acid rain was a major topic of research at the Experimental Lakes Area (ELA) in Northwestern Ontario, Canada. Researchers added sulfuric acid to whole lakes in controlled ecosystem experiments to simulate the effects of acid rain. Because its remote conditions allowed for whole-ecosystem experiments, research at the ELA showed that the effect of acid rain on fish populations started at concentrations much lower than those observed in laboratory experiments. In the context of a food web, fish populations crashed earlier than when acid rain had direct toxic effects to the fish because the acidity led to crashes in prey populations (e.g. mysids). As experimental acid inputs were reduced, fish populations and lake ecosystems recovered at least partially, although invertebrate populations have still not completely returned to the baseline conditions. This research showed both that acidification was linked to declining fish populations and that the effects could be reversed if sulfuric acid emissions decreased, and influenced policy in Canada and the United States.
In 1985, seven Canadian provinces (all except British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan) and the federal government signed the Eastern Canada Acid Rain Program. The provinces agreed to limit their combined sulfur dioxide emissions to 2.3 million tonnes by 1994. The Canada-US Air Quality Agreement was signed in 1991. In 1998, all federal, provincial, and territorial Ministers of Energy and Environment signed The Canada-Wide Acid Rain Strategy for Post-2000, which was designed to protect lakes that are more sensitive than those protected by earlier policies.

In India
Acid rain was first reported in Mumbai (then Bombay) in 1974. Acid rain has been a reported cause of decrease in soil pH, especially in the areas of northeast, coastal regions of Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, Bihar, and West Bengal.
The spread of acid rain over India was first studied by a team of researchers in 1989.
Increased risk might be posed by the expected rise in total sulphur emissions from 4,400 kilotonnes (kt) in 1990 to 6,500 kt in 2000, 10,900 kt in 2010 and 18,500 in 2020. Damage to Taj Mahal is a popular example of acid rain's corrosive effect in India.

Emissions of chemicals leading to acidification
The most important gas which leads to acidification is sulfur dioxide. Emissions of nitrogen oxides which are oxidized to form nitric acid are of increasing importance due to stricter controls on emissions of sulfur compounds. 70 Tg(S) per year in the form of SO2 comes from fossil fuel combustion and industry, 2.8 Tg(S) from wildfires, and 7–8 Tg(S) per year from volcanoes.

Natural phenomena
The principal natural phenomena that contribute acid-producing gases to the atmosphere are emissions from volcanoes. Thus, for example, fumaroles from the Laguna Caliente crater of Poás Volcano create extremely high amounts of acid rain and fog, with acidity as high as a pH of 2, clearing an area of any vegetation and frequently causing irritation to the eyes and lungs of inhabitants in nearby settlements. Acid-producing gasses are also created by biological processes that occur on the land, in wetlands, and in the oceans. The major biological source of sulfur compounds is dimethyl sulfide.
Nitric acid in rainwater is an important source of fixed nitrogen for plant life, and is also produced by electrical activity in the atmosphere such as lightning.
Acidic deposits have been detected in glacial ice thousands of years old in remote parts of the globe.

Human activity
The principal cause of acid rain is sulfur and nitrogen compounds from human sources, such as electricity generation, animal agriculture, factories, and motor vehicles. These also include power plants, which use electric power generators that account for a quarter of nitrogen oxides and two-thirds of sulfur dioxide within the atmosphere. Industrial acid rain is a substantial problem in China and Russia and areas downwind from them. These areas all burn sulfur-containing coal to generate heat and electricity.
The problem of acid rain has not only increased with population and industrial growth, but has become more widespread. The use of tall smokestacks to reduce local pollution has contributed to the spread of acid rain by releasing gases into regional atmospheric circulation; dispersal from these taller stacks causes pollutants to be carried farther, causing widespread ecological damage. Often deposition occurs a considerable distance downwind of the emissions, with mountainous regions tending to receive the greatest deposition (because of their higher rainfall). An example of this effect is the low pH of rain which falls in Scandinavia. Regarding low pH and pH imbalances in correlation to acid rain, low levels, or those under the pH value of 7, are considered acidic. Acid rain falls at a pH value of roughly 4, making it harmful to consume for humans. When these low pH levels fall in specific regions, they not only affect the environment but also human health. With acidic pH levels in humans comes hair loss, low urinary pH, severe mineral imbalances, constipation, and many cases of chronic disorders like Fibromyalgia and Basal Carcinoma.

Chemical process
Combustion of fuels and smelting of some ores produce sulfur dioxide and nitric oxides. They are converted into sulfuric acid and nitric acid.
In the gas phase sulfur dioxide is oxidized to sulfuric acid:

SO2 +  0.5 O2  +  H2O → H2SO4
Nitrogen dioxide reacts with hydroxyl radicals to form nitric acid:

NO2 + OH· → HNO3
The detailed mechanisms depend on the presence water and traces of iron and manganese. A number of oxidants are capable of these reactions aside from O2, these include ozone, hydrogen peroxide, and oxygen.

Acid deposition
Wet deposition
Wet deposition of acids occurs when any form of precipitation (rain, snow, and so on) removes acids from the atmosphere and delivers it to the Earth's surface. This can result from the deposition of acids produced in the raindrops (see aqueous phase chemistry above) or by the precipitation removing the acids either in clouds or below clouds. Wet removal of both gases and aerosols are both of importance for wet deposition.

Dry deposition
Acid deposition also occurs via dry deposition in the absence of precipitation. This can be responsible for as much as 20 to 60% of total acid deposition. This occurs when particles and gases stick to the ground, plants or other surfaces.

Adverse effects
Acid rain has been shown to have adverse impacts on forests, freshwaters and soils, killing insect and aquatic life-forms as well as causing damage to buildings and having impacts on human health.

Surface waters and aquatic animals
Sulfuric acid and nitric acid have multiple impacts on aquatic ecosystems, including acidification, increased nitrogen and aluminum content, and alteration of biogeochemical processes. Both the lower pH and higher aluminium concentrations in surface water that occur as a result of acid rain can cause damage to fish and other aquatic animals. At pH lower than 5 most fish eggs will not hatch and lower pH can kill adult fish. As lakes and rivers become more acidic, biodiversity is reduced. Acid rain has eliminated insect life and some fish species, including the brook trout in some lakes, streams, and creeks in geographically sensitive areas, such as the Adirondack Mountains of the United States.
However, the extent to which acid rain contributes directly or indirectly via runoff from the catchment to lake and river acidity (i.e., depending on characteristics of the surrounding watershed) is variable. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) website states: "Of the lakes and streams surveyed, acid rain caused acidity in 75% of the acidic lakes and about 50% of the acidic streams". Lakes hosted by silicate basement rocks are more acidic than lakes within limestone or other basement rocks with a carbonate composition (i.e. marble) due to buffering effects by carbonate minerals, even with the same amount of acid rain.

Soils
Soil biology and chemistry can be seriously damaged by acid rain. Some microbes are unable to tolerate changes to low pH and are killed. The enzymes of these microbes are denatured (changed in shape so they no longer function) by the acid. The hydronium ions of acid rain also mobilize toxins, such as aluminium, and leach away essential nutrients and minerals such as magnesium.

2 H+ (aq) + Mg2+ (clay) ⇌ 2 H+ (clay) + Mg2+ (aq)
Soil chemistry can be dramatically changed when base cations, such as calcium and magnesium, are leached by acid rain, thereby affecting sensitive species, such as sugar maple (Acer saccharum).
Soil acidification

Impacts of acidic water and soil acidification on plants could be minor or in most cases major. Most minor cases which do not result in fatality of plant life can be attributed to the plants being less susceptible to acidic conditions and/or the acid rain being less potent. However, even in minor cases, the plant will eventually die due to the acidic water lowering the plant's natural pH. Acidic water enters the plant and causes important plant minerals to dissolve and get carried away; which ultimately causes the plant to die of lack of minerals for nutrition. In major cases, which are more extreme, the same process of damage occurs as in minor cases, which is removal of essential minerals, but at a much quicker rate. Likewise, acid rain that falls on soil and on plant leaves causes drying of the waxy leaf cuticle, which ultimately causes rapid water loss from the plant to the outside atmosphere and eventually results in death of the plant. Soil acidification can lead to a decline in soil microbes as a result of a change in pH, which would have an adverse effect on plants due to their dependence on soil microbes to access nutrients. To see if a plant is being affected by soil acidification, one can closely observe the plant leaves. If the leaves are green and look healthy, the soil pH is normal and acceptable for plant life. But if the plant leaves have yellowing between the veins on their leaves, that means the plant is suffering from acidification and is unhealthy. Moreover, a plant suffering from soil acidification cannot photosynthesize; the acid-water-induced process of drying out of the plant can destroy chloroplast organelles. Without being able to photosynthesize, a plant cannot create nutrients for its own survival or oxygen for the survival of aerobic organisms, which affects most species on Earth and ultimately ends the purpose of the plant's existence.

Forests and other vegetation
Adverse effects may be indirectly related to acid rain, like the acid's effects on soil (see above) or high concentration of gaseous precursors to acid rain. High altitude forests are especially vulnerable as they are often surrounded by clouds and fog which are more acidic than rain.
Plants are capable of adapting to acid rain. On Jinyun Mountain, Chongqing, plant species were seen adapting to new environmental conditions. The affects on the species ranged from being beneficial to detrimental. With natural rainfall or mild acid rainfall, the biochemical and physiological characteristics of plant seedlings were enhanced. However, once the pH decreases below the threshold of 3.5, the acid rain can no longer be beneficial and begins to have negative affects.
Acid rain can negatively impact photosynthesis in plant leaves, when leaves are exposed to a lower pH, photosynthesis is impacted due to the decline in chlorophyll. Acid rain also has the ability to cause deformation to leaves at a cellular level, examples include; tissue scaring and changes to the stomatal, epidermis and mesophyll cells. Additional impacts of acid rain includes a decline in cuticle thickness present on the leaf surface. Because acid rain damages leaves, this directly impacts a plants ability to have a strong canopy cover, a decline in canopy cover can lead plants to be more vulnerable to diseases.
Dead or dying trees often appear in areas impacted by acid rain. Acid rain causes aluminum to leach from the soil, posing risks to both plant and animal life. Furthermore, it strips the soil of critical minerals and nutrients necessary for tree growth.
At higher altitudes, acidic fog and clouds can deplete nutrients from tree foliage, leading to discolored or dead leaves and needles. This depletion compromises the trees' ability to absorb sunlight, weakening them and diminishing their capacity to endure cold conditions.
Other plants can also be damaged by acid rain, but the effect on food crops is minimized by the application of lime and fertilizers to replace lost nutrients. In cultivated areas, limestone may also be added to increase the ability of the soil to keep the pH stable, but this tactic is largely unusable in the case of wilderness lands. When calcium is leached from the needles of red spruce, these trees become less cold tolerant and exhibit winter injury and even death. Acid rain may also affect crop productivity by necrosis or changes to soil nutrients, which ultimately prevent plants from reaching maturity.

Ocean acidification
Acid rain has a much less harmful effect on oceans on a global scale, but it creates an amplified impact in the shallower waters of coastal waters. Acid rain can cause the ocean's pH to fall, known as ocean acidification, making it more difficult for different coastal species to create their exoskeletons that they need to survive. These coastal species link together as part of the ocean's food chain, and without them being a source for other marine life to feed off of, more marine life will die. Coral's limestone skeleton is particularly sensitive to pH decreases, because the calcium carbonate, a core component of the limestone skeleton, dissolves in acidic (low pH) solutions.
In addition to acidification, excess nitrogen inputs from the atmosphere promote increased growth of phytoplankton and other marine plants, which, in turn, may cause more frequent harmful algal blooms and eutrophication (the creation of oxygen-depleted "dead zones") in some parts of the ocean.

Human health effects
Acid rain can negatively impact human health, especially when people breathe in particles released from acid rain. The effects of acid rain on human health are complex and may be seen in several ways, such as respiratory issues for long-term exposure and indirect exposure through contaminated food and water sources.

Nitrogen Dioxide Effects
Exposure to air pollutants associated with acid rain, such as nitrogen dioxide (NO2), may have a negative impact on respiratory health. Water-soluble nitrogen dioxide accumulates in the tiny airways, where it is transformed into nitric and nitrous acids. Pneumonia caused by nitric acids directly damages the epithelial cells lining the airways, resulting in pulmonary edema. Exposure to nitrogen dioxide also reduces the immune response by inhibiting the generation of inflammatory cytokines by alveolar macrophages in response to bacterial infection. In animal studies, the pollutant further reduces respiratory immunity by decreasing mucociliary clearance in the lower respiratory tract, which results in a reduced ability to remove respiratory infections.

Sulfur Trioxide Effects
The effects of sulfur trioxide and sulfuric acid are similar because they both produce sulfuric acid when they come into touch with the wet surfaces of your skin or respiratory system. The amount of SO3 breath through the mouth is larger than the amount of SO3 breath through the nose. When humans breathe in sulfur trioxide, small droplets of sulfuric acid will form inside the body and enter the respiratory tract to the lungs depending on the particle size. The effects of SO3 on the respiratory system lead to breathing difficulty in people who have asthma symptoms. Sulfur trioxide also causes very corrosive and irritation on the skin, eye, and gastrointestinal tracts when there is direct exposure to a specific concentration or long-term exposure. Consuming concentrated sulfuric acid has been known to burn the mouth and throat, erode a hole in the stomach, burns when it comes into contact with skin, make your eyes weep if it gets into them, and mortality.

Federal Government's recommendation
Nitrogen Dioxides
A 25 parts per million (ppm) maximum for nitric oxide in working air has been set by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for an 8-hour workday and a 40-hour workweek. Additionally, OSHA has established a 5-ppm nitrogen dioxide exposure limit for 15 minutes in the workplace.

Sulfur Trioxide
The not-to-exceed limits in the air, water, soil, or food that are recommended by regulations are often based on levels that affect animals before being modified to assist in safeguarding people. Depending on whether they employ different animal studies, have different exposure lengths (e.g., an 8-hour workday versus a 24-hour day), or for other reasons, these not-to-exceed values can vary between federal bodies.
The amount of sulfur dioxide that can be emitted into the atmosphere is capped by the EPA. This reduces the quantity of sulfur dioxide in the air that turns into sulfur trioxide and sulfuric acid. Sulfuric acid concentrations in workroom air are restricted by OSHA to 1 mg/m3. Moreover, NIOSH advises a time-weighted average limit of 1 mg/m3.

Other adverse effects
Acid rain can damage buildings, historic monuments, and statues, especially those made of rocks, such as limestone and marble, that contain large amounts of calcium carbonate. Acids in the rain react with the calcium compounds in the stones to create gypsum, which then flakes off.

CaCO3 (s) + H2SO4 (aq) ⇌ CaSO4 (s) + CO2 (g) + H2O (l)
The effects of this are commonly seen on old gravestones, where acid rain can cause the inscriptions to become completely illegible. Acid rain also increases the corrosion rate of metals, in particular iron, steel, copper and bronze.

Affected areas
Places significantly impacted by acid rain around the globe include most of eastern Europe from Poland northward into Scandinavia, the eastern third of the United States, and southeastern Canada. Other affected areas include the southeastern coast of China and Taiwan.

Prevention methods
Technical solutions
Many coal-firing power stations use flue-gas desulfurization (FGD) to remove sulfur-containing gases from their stack gases. For a typical coal-fired power station, FGD will remove 95% or more of the SO2 in the flue gases. An example of FGD is the wet scrubber which is commonly used. A wet scrubber is basically a reaction tower equipped with a fan that extracts hot smoke stack gases from a power plant into the tower. Lime or limestone in slurry form is also injected into the tower to mix with the stack gases and combine with the sulfur dioxide present. The calcium carbonate of the limestone produces pH-neutral calcium sulfate that is physically removed from the scrubber. That is, the scrubber turns sulfur pollution into industrial sulfates.
In some areas the sulfates are sold to chemical companies as gypsum when the purity of calcium sulfate is high. In others, they are placed in landfill. The effects of acid rain can last for generations, as the effects of pH level change can stimulate the continued leaching of undesirable chemicals into otherwise pristine water sources, killing off vulnerable insect and fish species and blocking efforts to restore native life.
Fluidized bed combustion also reduces the amount of sulfur emitted by power production.
Vehicle emissions control reduces emissions of nitrogen oxides from motor vehicles.

International treaties
International treaties on the long-range transport of atmospheric pollutants have been agreed upon by western countries for some time now. Beginning in 1979, European countries convened in order to ratify general principles discussed during the UNECE Convention. The purpose was to combat Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. The 1985 Helsinki Protocol on the Reduction of Sulfur Emissions under the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution furthered the results of the convention. Results of the treaty have already come to fruition, as evidenced by an approximate 40 percent drop in particulate matter in North America. The effectiveness of the Convention in combatting acid rain has inspired further acts of international commitment to prevent the proliferation of particulate matter. Canada and the US signed the Air Quality Agreement in 1991. Most European countries and Canada signed the treaties. Activity of the Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution Convention remained dormant after 1999, when 27 countries convened to further reduce the effects of acid rain. In 2000, foreign cooperation to prevent acid rain was sparked in Asia for the first time. Ten diplomats from countries ranging throughout the continent convened to discuss ways to prevent acid rain. Following these discussions, the Acid Deposition Monitoring Network in East Asia (EANET) was established in 2001 as an intergovernmental initiative to provide science-based inputs for decision makers and promote international cooperation on acid deposition in East Asia. In 2023, the EANET member countries include Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Republic of Korea, Russia, Thailand and Vietnam.

Emissions trading
In this regulatory scheme, every current polluting facility is given or may purchase on an open market an emissions allowance for each unit of a designated pollutant it emits. Operators can then install pollution control equipment, and sell portions of their emissions allowances they no longer need for their own operations, thereby recovering some of the capital cost of their investment in such equipment. The intention is to give operators economic incentives to install pollution controls.
The first emissions trading market was established in the United States by enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. The overall goal of the Acid Rain Program established by the Act is to achieve significant environmental and public health benefits through reductions in emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxides (NOx), the primary causes of acid rain. To achieve this goal at the lowest cost to society, the program employs both regulatory and market based approaches for controlling air pollution.

See also
Alkaline precipitation
Citizen science – one of two 'first uses' of the term was in an acid rain campaign in 1989.
List of environmental issues
Lists of environmental topics
Ocean acidification
Rain dust (an alkaline rain)
Soil retrogression and degradation

References
Further reading
Ritchie, Hannah, "What We Learned from Acid Rain: By working together, the nations of the world can solve climate change", Scientific American, vol. 330, no. 1 (January 2024), pp. 75–76. "[C]ountries will act only if they know others are willing to do the same. With acid rain, they did act collectively.... We did something similar to restore Earth's protective ozone layer.... [T]he cost of technology really matters.... In the past decade the price of solar energy has fallen by more than 90 percent and that of wind energy by more than 70 percent. Battery costs have tumbled by 98 percent since 1990, bringing the price of electric cars down with them....[T]he stance of elected officials matters more than their party affiliation.... Change can happen – but not on its own. We need to drive it." (p. 76.)

External links

National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program Report – a 98-page report to Congress (2005)
Acid rain for schools
Acid rain for schools – Hubbard Brook
United States Environmental Protection Agency – New England Acid Rain Program (superficial)
Acid Rain (more depth than ref. above)
U.S. Geological Survey – What is acid rain?
Acid Rain: A Continuing National Tragedy – a report from The Adirondack Council on acid rain in the Adirondack region (1998)
What Happens to Acid Rain?
Acid Rain and how it affects fish and other aquatic organisms
Fourth Report for Policy Makers (RPM4): Towards Clean Air for Sustainable Future in East Asia through Collaborative Activities- a report for policy-makers, Acid Deposition Monitoring Network in East Asia, EANET, (2019).

================================================================================

# Active mobility

Active mobility, soft mobility, active travel, active transport or active transportation is the transport of people or goods, through non-motorized means, based around human physical activity. The best-known forms of active mobility are walking and cycling, though other modes include running, rowing, skateboarding, kick scooters and roller skates. Due to its prevalence, cycling is sometimes considered separately from the other forms of active mobility.
Public policies promoting active mobility tend to improve health indicators by increasing the levels of physical fitness and reducing the rates of obesity and diabetes, whilst also reducing the consumption of fossil fuels and consequent carbon emissions. These policies are proven to result in large increases in active transportation for commuting: for example Portland, Oregon, was able to increase bicycle use 5-fold from 1990 to 2009 with pro-cycling programs. Studies have shown that city level programs are more effective than encouraging active mobility on the individual level.

Health
Health benefits of active mobility include alleviating urban pressures, reduced energy consumption and production, and improved quality of life. Commonly active transport prevents the chances of fatal disease rooted from pollution and environmental issues. Active mobility improves health by decreasing air pollution from cars. However, negative health problems can arise from inactive and sedentary lifestyles. The US Centers for Disease Control recommends increasing access to active transportation. Multiple U.S. studies advocate for increased access to active transportation for everyone, including children, due to multiple health benefits.
Sedentary people can lower their BMI by increasing physical activity. A House of Commons of the United Kingdom Health Committee report about Obesity in 2004 recommended cycling and walking as key components to combat obesity. Public Health England estimated in 2016 that in the UK, physical inactivity directly contributes to one in six deaths every year. The PHE report notes that walking and cycling daily is effective to increase physical activity and reduce levels of obesity, as well as prevent cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, cancer and several mental illnesses, including depression.

Physical exercise improves mental and physical health. Cyclists and walkers perceive their environment differently than people driving in cars because cars block sensory inputs that active mobility exposes. Proponents of active mobility assert that activities like cycling and walking promote a feeling of community and connection, improving mental health and overall wellbeing.
Providing good infrastructure for active mobility effectively promotes this type of transportation to decrease traffic and urban congestion. Cycling and walking can save money by reducing money spent on gasoline. Consequences of cycling and walking include increased exposure to air pollution, noise, and more frequent accidents. Cycling reduces the need for large roads and parking lots as bikes occupy 8% of available space compared to cars. As cycling and walking increases, urban infrastructure can be transformed to parks to add green space to urban environments. Aesthetically pleasing areas can become optimal places for walking and cycling in cities. Urban environments can also be transformed into walkable areas, which can benefit the elderly, but safety can be problematic if areas are congested with cars. Designing safe walkable areas in cities can increase the popularity of walking, decrease physical inactivity, and improve health.
Additionally, electric bike users benefit from this type of physical activity. In seven European cities, electric bike users had 10% higher weekly energy expenditure than other cyclists. People switching to e-bike from either private cars or public transport expend more energy as physical activity increases, gaining between 550 and 880 Metabolic Equivalent Task minutes per week. Electric bikes may act as a cycling enabler for women.

Environment
An environmental benefit of active mobility is reducing greenhouse gas emissions to slow global warming. Every year, a typical car emits 4.6 metric tons of carbon dioxide. As a greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide in the atmosphere speeds up the effects of climate change. As automobile use increases greenhouse gas emissions, the rates in which our Earth is reaching climate tipping point thresholds are escalating. Active mobility lowers daily greenhouse gas emissions, slowing these tipping points. For example, in New Zealand, active mobility has been found to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide by 1% annually. In a study of 7 European cities, it was found that individual changes in active travel come with significant lifecycle carbon emissions benefits, even in European urban contexts with already high walking and cycling shares. An increase in cycling or walking consistently and independently decreased mobility-related lifecycle CO2 emissions. An average person cycling 1 trip/day more and driving 1 trip/day less for 200 days a year would decrease mobility-related lifecycle CO2 emissions by about 0.5 tonnes over a year.
Air and noise pollution are negative effects of vehicular transport. Air pollution negatively affects human health and the environment. Air pollution can cause acid rain, eutrophication, haze, wildlife deaths, thinning of Earth's ozone layer, crop damage, and global climate change. Noise pollution disrupts ecosystems and wildlife. Active mobility reduces air and noise pollution by substituting for cars that produce greenhouse gases and noise, benefiting the environment and urban ecosystems.

Government responses
Active mobility has appealed to policymakers because of its beneficial contributions to physical health and reductions of air pollution, leading to legislative efforts to make cycling and walking safer and more attractive for commuting and personal errands. These measures include infrastructure changes to accommodate more cyclists and pedestrians on roads, regulations to limit car traffic, and education and training to improve the coordination between motor vehicles and individuals using active mobility. Infrastructure developments that have been correlated with increased active mobility are wider sidewalks, street lighting, flat terrain, and urban greenery, particularly with access to parks. Cycling in particular requires more infrastructure development to achieve a noticeable increase in use, including:

Bike lanes: a separate lane on a conventional road designated by signage and street markings to be reserved for bicycles.
Bike boxes: areas at an intersection designated for bicycles to occupy when stopped.
Bicycle stations: specialized parking facilities that also include basic tools for bicycle maintenance.
Several researchers have also emphasized that the largest contribution to active mobility comes from easy access to local amenities such as restaurants, shops, and theaters, which can be promoted by local governments. A significant concern about increased active mobility is a corresponding increase in injuries and deaths, especially between pedestrians or cyclists and motor vehicles. Active mobility may often be more time-consuming than commuting by vehicle, and the effects of distance, geographic features such as hills, and climate may make outdoor exertion uncomfortable or impractical. Another criticism of active transportation policy contends that converting traffic lanes for bicycle use makes travel more difficult for commuters who must a motor vehicle.

Active mobility by country
European Union
The European Union's Mobility and Transport organization includes the promotion of walking and cycling among its strategies to enable more sustainable transportation in Europe. The European Union has also adopted a Vision Zero goal to eliminate all traffic deaths, seeking to mitigate the number of incidents between pedestrians and cyclists and motor vehicles, as these commonly result in serious injury or death. Separate from the European Union, several European cities and regions founded an organization, Polis, in 1989 to coordinate efforts between local governments and the European Union to improve the efficiency of transportation. This includes the facilitation of active mobility, which Polis states provides benefits to the environment and to the public's physical health and asserts that these improvements contribute to the economy as well. Polis recommends that policy decisions should account for benefits from reduced health and environmental costs from active mobility, increased city accessibility from reduced congestion and pollution, and consider regulations on vehicle design to address concerns of safety and convenience. Polis encourages the development of Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans (SUMPs) to guide mobility projects in cities of all sizes.

Netherlands
Active mobility is used widely in the Netherlands, comprising more than 40% of commuting in urban areas. The flat topography and temperate climate of the Netherlands benefits active mobility, which has been supported by government policy for decades, including 35,000 kilometers of dedicated cycling paths. As a result, the Dutch government estimates that there are about 1.3 bikes per person in the Netherlands. A consequence of this is that about 20% of Dutch road accident fatalities are cyclists, with more than 100 cyclists perishing each year. This rate and number are higher than most other European countries, reflecting the high use of active mobility in the Netherlands. However, policy efforts by the Ministry of Industry and Water Management may have contributed to a declining mortality rate, which fell more than 30% from 2007 to 2016.

Singapore
The Land Transport Authority (LTA) of Singapore pursues a stated goal to supplement mechanized transportation methods with "walk and cycle options".  Following a test plan implemented in the neighborhood of Tampines, the Minister of Transport presented a National Cycling Plan in 2013 to provide paths to integrate cycling with Singapore's extensive Mass Rapid Transit system. This includes 190 kilometers of paths, thousands of bicycle parking racks, signage, and cyclist education. These efforts have been criticized, however, as being limited in scope, especially for limiting the expansion of cycling access to off-road connections, such as through the Park Connectors Network, rather than more infrastructure for commuting in cities.

United Kingdom
The Association of Directors of Public Health in the United Kingdom, joined by over one hundred signatory organizations including Sustrans and the Royal College of Physicians on a position paper on active travel, set out a number of clear policy measures recommended for local planning and highway authorities, including:

A 20 mph (32 km/h) speed limit for residential areas.
Cycling road infrastructure that provides for convenient and practical transportation.
Education of drivers and revamped law enforcement to improve road safety.
Publishing clear goals for the expansion of active transportation.

England
The UK Government's plan for active travel in England was released in 2020 and is known as Gear Change. The plan aims to make England a 'great cycling nation'. The plan aims to create cycling and walking corridors, introduce more low-traffic neighbourhoods and school streets, aims to set high standards for cycling infrastructure. The plan accompanies £2 billion in additional funding over the following five years for cycling and walking announced in May 2020. The plan also introduced a new body and inspectorate known as Active Travel England.

Scotland
Scottish Government policy aims to increase the use of active travel modes in Scotland for shorter journeys and to make active mobility safer and inclusive. The National Walking Strategy was published in 2017 and the Cycling Action Plan for Scotland (CAPS) was last updated in 2017.
The active travel advocacy group Cycling UK criticised the Scottish Government for not increasing funding for active travel. The Scottish budget allocates £100 million for cycling and walking, which is 3.3% of the transport budget or the total cost of three miles of the A9 dualling scheme. Within the public sector in Scotland the transport sector has the lowest percentage of women in senior posts. Only 6.25% of heads of transport bodies are women.

Wales
Other steps include the Active Travel (Wales) Act 2013, which passed in 2013. The act requires local authorities to continuously improve facilities and routes for pedestrians and cyclists and to prepare maps identifying current and potential future routes for their use. It also requires road improvement and development projects to consider the needs of pedestrians and cyclists at the design stage.

United States
Residents of the United States use active mobility as a mode of transportation less often than residents of other countries. The far greater mortality rates of pedestrians and cyclists in U.S. cities has been cited as a contributing factor to this trend. Efforts to increase use of active mobility have been undertaken at the federal levels by the U.S. Department of Transportation, which pursues the development of active commuting through its Livability Initiative. The Livability Initiative includes billions of dollars of funding through several grant programs, including the Better Utilizing Investments to Leverage Development (BUILD), Infrastructure for Rebuilding America (INFRA), and the Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (TIFIA), to facilitate the construction of infrastructure supportive of increased pedestrian and bicycle traffic. Funding increases for these programs, such as the Fixing America's Surface Transportation (FAST) act of 2015, have garnered bipartisan support. Multiple cities in the United States, including Seattle, Chicago, Minneapolis, Sacramento, and Houston, have implemented their own policies to encourage the active mobility for commuting to work and to school. More extensive efforts involve detailed active transportation programs (ATPs), such as those implemented in California, Portland, Oregon, Fort Worth, Texas, and San Diego County. However, these efforts have struggled to promote measurable changes in the percentage of commuters using active transportation to work: in the United States Census Bureau’s American Community Survey, 3.4% of Americans biked or walked to work in 2013, and only 3.1% did so in 2018.

Disabled people
People with disabilities often face more issues with active transport than those without disabilities.
Some people have medical barriers to active travel. There are some instances where it is not possible for a person to walk or cycle, and, even if the physical, societal and financial barriers were removed, some would still need access to a motor vehicle.
An immediate barrier for disabled people walking on roads is the inaccessibility of streetspace, for example:

Clutter on footpaths, e.g. road signs and electric vehicle charging points
Uneven or steep footpaths
A lack of dropped kerbs and tactile paving
A lack of places for people to stop to rest
Hazards caused by shared space with vehicles
For those who wish to cycle, barriers can include narrow cycle lanes, infrastructure that requires a cyclist to dismount, physical access barriers and a lack of suitable cycle parking facilities.

Gender differences
In some cities and countries women lead the way when it comes to walking. 54% of journeys completed wholly on foot in London are made by women.
According to research into gender differences in active travel across a range of international cities, women are more likely than men to walk and more likely to use public transport. The gender differences in active travel metrics are age dependent. Women's and men's perception of danger and safety offer differential travel experience. Research highlights the importance of a gendered approach towards healthy living and active transport policy making with considerations for reducing road traffic danger and male violence.
Men are more likely to have access to private cars than women. Design that benefits cars over other modes of transport disproportionately benefits men. Men and women tend to have different patterns of journeys. Women are more likely to be trip chaining, and trip chaining encourages car use. Women are also more likely to be 'encumbered' by carrying children, shopping or accompanied by elderly companions In the UK fewer women cycle than men  and road safety is cited as a concern relating to cycling and to walking. A Sustrans report in the UK found a lack of evidence that women participate in creating transport policy and planning.

See also
Automobile dependency
Bicycle-friendly – Urban planning prioritising cycling
Cyclability
Carfree city – Urban area absent of motor vehicles
Health impact of light rail systems
Human-powered transport
Motor vehicle
Outline of cycling
Pedestrian village – Urban planning for mixed-use areas prioritising pedestrians
Street reclamation – Changing streets to focus on non-car use
Urban vitality

References
External links
Association of Directors of Public Health
CTC: The UK National Cyclist's Organisation
Sustrans: UK Sustainable Transport Charity

================================================================================

# Atmospheric humidity

Humidity is the concentration of water vapor present in the air. Water vapor, the gaseous state of water, is generally invisible to the naked eye. Humidity indicates the likelihood for precipitation, dew, or fog to be present.
Humidity depends on the temperature and pressure of the system of interest. The same amount of water vapor results in higher relative humidity in cool air than warm air. A related parameter is the dew point. The amount of water vapor needed to achieve saturation increases as the temperature increases. As the temperature of a parcel of air decreases it will eventually reach the saturation point without adding or losing water mass. The amount of water vapor contained within a parcel of air can vary significantly. For example, a parcel of air near saturation may contain 8 g of water per cubic metre of air at 8 °C (46 °F), and 28 g of water per cubic metre of air at 30 °C (86 °F)
Three primary measurements of humidity are widely employed: absolute, relative, and specific. Absolute humidity is the mass of water vapor per volume of air (in grams per cubic meter). Relative humidity, often expressed as a percentage, indicates a present state of absolute humidity relative to a maximum humidity given the same temperature. Specific humidity is the ratio of water vapor mass to total moist air parcel mass.
Humidity plays an important role for surface life. For animal life dependent on perspiration (sweating) to regulate internal body temperature, high humidity impairs heat exchange efficiency by reducing the rate of moisture evaporation from skin surfaces. This effect can be calculated using a heat index table, or alternatively using a similar humidex.
The notion of air "holding" water vapor or being "saturated" by it is often mentioned in connection with the concept of relative humidity. This, however, is misleading—the amount of water vapor that enters (or can enter) a given space at a given temperature is almost independent of the amount of air (nitrogen, oxygen, etc.) that is present. Indeed, a vacuum has approximately the same equilibrium capacity to hold water vapor as the same volume filled with air; both are given by the equilibrium vapor pressure of water at the given temperature. There is a very small difference described under "Enhancement factor" below, which can be neglected in many calculations unless great accuracy is required.

Definitions
Absolute humidity
Absolute humidity is the total mass of water vapor (gas form of water) present in a given volume or mass of air. It does not take temperature into consideration. Absolute humidity in the atmosphere ranges from near zero to roughly 30 g (1.1 oz) per cubic metre when the air is saturated at 30 °C (86 °F).
Air is a gas, and its volume varies with pressure and temperature, per Boyle's law.  Absolute humidity is defined as water mass per volume of air.  A given mass of air will grow or shrink as the temperature or pressure varies. So the absolute humidity of a mass of air will vary due to changes in temperature or pressure, even when the proportion of water in that mass of air (its specific humidity) remains constant.  This makes the term absolute humidity as defined not ideal for some situations. 
Absolute humidity is the mass of the water vapor 

        (

          m

                H

                2

              O

        )

    {\displaystyle (m_{{\text{H}}_{2}{\text{O}}})}

, divided by the volume of the air and water vapor mixture 

        (

          V

            net

        )

    {\displaystyle (V_{\text{net}})}

, which can be expressed as:

        A
        H
        =

              m

                    H

                    2

                  O

              V

                net

        .

    {\displaystyle AH={\frac {m_{{\text{H}}_{2}{\text{O}}}}{V_{\text{net}}}}.}

  In the equation above, if the volume is not set, the absolute humidity varies with changes in air temperature or pressure. Because of this variability, use of the term absolute humidity as defined is inappropriate for computations in chemical engineering, such as drying, where temperature variations might be significant. As a result, absolute humidity in chemical engineering may refer to mass of water vapor per unit mass of dry air, also known as the humidity ratio or mass mixing ratio (see "specific humidity" below), which is better suited for heat and mass balance calculations.  Mass of water per unit volume as in the equation above is also defined as volumetric humidity. Because of the potential confusion, British Standard BS 1339 suggests avoiding the term "absolute humidity". Units should always be carefully checked.  Many humidity charts are given in g/kg or kg/kg, but any mass units may be used.

Relative humidity
Relative humidity is the ratio of how much water vapour is in the air to how much water vapour the air could potentially contain at a given temperature and pressure. 
If a sample of humid air at temperature T1 contains water vapour with partial pressure Pw the relative humidity RH is:

        R
        H
        =

              P

                w

              P

                s

    {\displaystyle RH={\frac {P_{w}}{P_{s}}}}

where Ps is the saturation pressure of water at temperature T1.
Relative humidity varies with any change in the temperature or pressure of the air: colder air can contain less vapour, and water will tend to condense out of the air more at lower temperatures. So changing the temperature of air can change the relative humidity, even when the specific humidity remains constant. If two parcels of air have the same specific humidity and temperature but different pressures, the parcel at the higher pressure will have the higher relative humidity.
Cooling air increases the relative humidity. If the relative humidity rises to 100% (the dew point) and there is an available surface or particle, the water vapour will condense into liquid or deposit into ice. Likewise, warming air decreases the relative humidity. Warming some air containing a fog may cause that fog to evaporate, as the droplets are prone to total evaporation due to the lowering partial pressure of water vapour in that air, as the temperature rises.
Relative humidity only considers the invisible water vapour. Mists, clouds, fogs and aerosols of water do not count towards the measure of relative humidity of the air, although their presence is an indication that a body of air may be close to the dew point.
Relative humidity is normally expressed as a percentage; a higher percentage means that the air–water mixture is more humid. At 100% relative humidity, the air is saturated and is at its dew point. In the absence of a foreign body on which droplets or crystals can nucleate, the relative humidity can exceed 100%, in which case the air is said to be supersaturated. Introduction of some particles or a surface to a body of air above 100% relative humidity will allow condensation or ice to form on those nuclei, thereby removing some of the vapour and lowering the humidity.
In a scientific notion, the relative humidity (

        R
        H

    {\displaystyle RH}

 or 

        ϕ

    {\displaystyle \phi }

) of an air-water mixture is defined as the ratio of the partial pressure of water vapor (

        p

    {\displaystyle p}

) in air to the saturation vapor pressure (

          p

            s

    {\displaystyle p_{s}}

) of water at the same temperature, usually expressed as a percentage:

        ϕ
        =
        100
        %
        ⋅
        p

          /

          p

            s

    {\displaystyle \phi =100\%\cdot p/p_{s}}

Relative humidity is an important metric used in weather forecasts and reports, as it is an indicator of the likelihood of precipitation, dew, or fog.  In hot summer weather, a rise in relative humidity increases the apparent temperature to humans (and other animals) by hindering the evaporation of perspiration from the skin. For example, according to the heat index, a relative humidity of 75% at air temperature of 80.0 °F (26.7 °C) would feel like 83.6 ± 1.3 °F (28.7 ± 0.7 °C).
Because wood changes shape with changes in humidity, relative humidity is used to evaluate moisture content and size changes in wood, such as making allowances for seasonal movement in wood floors.

Specific humidity
Specific humidity (or moisture content) is the ratio of the mass of water vapor to the total mass of the air parcel. Specific humidity is approximately equal to the mixing ratio, which is defined as the ratio of the mass of water vapor in an air parcel to the mass of dry air for the same parcel.  It is typically represented with the symbol ω, and is commonly used in HVAC system design.

Related concepts
The term relative humidity is reserved for systems of water vapor in air. The term relative saturation is used to describe the analogous property for systems consisting of a condensable phase other than water in a non-condensable phase other than air.

Measurement
A device used to measure humidity of air is called a psychrometer or hygrometer. A humidistat is a humidity-triggered switch, often used to control a humidifier or a dehumidifier.
The humidity of an air and water vapor mixture is determined through the use of psychrometric charts if both the dry bulb temperature (T) and the wet bulb temperature (Tw) of the mixture are known. These quantities are readily estimated by using a sling psychrometer.
There are several empirical formulas that can be used to estimate the equilibrium vapor pressure of water vapor as a function of temperature. The Antoine equation is among the least complex of these, having only three parameters (A, B, and C). Other formulas, such as the Goff–Gratch equation and the Magnus–Tetens approximation, are more complicated but yield better accuracy.
The Arden Buck equation is commonly encountered in the literature regarding this topic:

          e

            w

            ∗

        =

          (

            1.0007
            +
            3.46
            ×

              10

                −
                6

            P

          )

        ×
        6.1121

          e

            17.502
            T

              /

            (
            240.97
            +
            T
            )

        ,

    {\displaystyle e_{w}^{*}=\left(1.0007+3.46\times 10^{-6}P\right)\times 6.1121\,e^{17.502T/(240.97+T)},}

where 

        T

    {\displaystyle T}

 is the dry-bulb temperature expressed in degrees Celsius (°C), 

        P

    {\displaystyle P}

 is the absolute pressure expressed in millibars, and 

          e

            w

            ∗

    {\displaystyle e_{w}^{*}}

 is the equilibrium vapor pressure expressed in millibars. Buck has reported that the maximal relative error is less than 0.20% between −20 and +50 °C (−4 and 122 °F) when this particular form of the generalized formula is used to estimate the equilibrium vapor pressure of water.
There are various devices used to measure and regulate humidity. Calibration standards for the most accurate measurement include the gravimetric hygrometer, chilled mirror hygrometer, and electrolytic hygrometer. The gravimetric method, while the most accurate, is very cumbersome. For fast and very accurate measurement the chilled mirror method is effective.  For process on-line measurements, the most commonly used sensors nowadays are based on capacitance measurements to measure relative humidity, frequently with internal conversions to display absolute humidity as well. These are cheap, simple, generally accurate and relatively robust. All humidity sensors face problems in measuring dust-laden gas, such as exhaust streams from clothes dryers.
Humidity is also measured on a global scale using remotely placed satellites. These satellites are able to detect the concentration of water in the troposphere at altitudes between 4 and 12 km (2.5 and 7.5 mi). Satellites that can measure water vapor have sensors that are sensitive to infrared radiation. Water vapor specifically absorbs and re-radiates radiation in this spectral band. Satellite water vapor imagery plays an important role in monitoring climate conditions (like the formation of thunderstorms) and in the development of weather forecasts.

Air density and volume
Humidity depends on water vaporization and condensation, which, in turn, mainly depends on temperature. Therefore, when applying more pressure to a gas saturated with water, all components will initially decrease in volume approximately according to the ideal gas law. However, some of the water will condense until returning to almost the same humidity as before, giving the resulting total volume deviating from what the ideal gas law predicted. 
Conversely, decreasing temperature would also make some water condense, again making the final volume deviate from predicted by the ideal gas law. Therefore, gas volume may alternatively be expressed as the dry volume, excluding the humidity content. This fraction more accurately follows the ideal gas law. On the contrary the saturated volume is the volume a gas mixture would have if humidity was added to it until saturation (or 100% relative humidity).
Humid air is less dense than dry air because a molecule of water (m ≈ 18 Da) is less massive than either a molecule of nitrogen (m ≈ 28) or a molecule of oxygen (m ≈ 32). About 78% of the molecules in dry air are nitrogen (N2). Another 21% of the molecules in dry air are oxygen (O2). The final 1% of dry air is a mixture of other gases.
For any gas, at a given temperature and pressure, the number of molecules present in a particular volume is constant.  Therefore, when some number N of water molecules (vapor) is introduced into a volume of dry air, the number of air molecules in that volume must decrease by the same number N for the pressure to remain constant without using a change in temperature. The numbers are exactly equal if we consider the gases as ideal. The addition of water molecules, or any other molecules, to a gas, without removal of an equal number of other molecules, will necessarily require a change in temperature, pressure, or total volume; that is, a change in at least one of these three parameters.  
If temperature and pressure remain constant, the volume increases, and the dry air molecules that were displaced will initially move out into the additional volume, after which the mixture will eventually become uniform through diffusion.  Hence the mass per unit volume of the gas—its density—decreases. Isaac Newton discovered this phenomenon and wrote about it in his book Opticks.

Pressure dependence
The relative humidity of an air–water system is dependent not only on the temperature but also on the absolute pressure of the system of interest. This dependence is demonstrated by considering the air–water system shown below. The system is closed (i.e., no matter enters or leaves the system).

State A to B
If the system at State A is isobarically heated (heating with no change in system pressure), then the relative humidity of the system decreases because the equilibrium vapor pressure of water increases with increasing temperature. This is shown in State B.
State A to C
If the system at State A is isothermally compressed (compressed with no change in system temperature), then the relative humidity of the system increases because the partial pressure of water in the system increases with the volume reduction. This is shown in State C. Above 202.64 kPa, the RH would exceed 100% and water may begin to condense.
If the pressure of State A was changed by simply adding more dry air, without changing the volume, the relative humidity would not change.
Therefore, a change in relative humidity can be explained by a change in system temperature, a change in the volume of the system, or change in both of these system properties.

Enhancement factor
The enhancement factor 

        (

          f

            w

        )

    {\displaystyle (f_{w})}

 is defined as the ratio of the saturated vapor pressure of water in moist air 

        (

          e

            w

          ′

        )

    {\displaystyle (e'_{w})}

 to the saturated vapor pressure of pure water:

          f

            W

        =

              e

                w

              ′

              e

                w

                ∗

        .

    {\displaystyle f_{W}={\frac {e'_{w}}{e_{w}^{*}}}.}

The enhancement factor is equal to unity for ideal gas systems. However, in real systems the interaction effects between gas molecules result in a small increase of the equilibrium vapor pressure of water in air relative to equilibrium vapor pressure of pure water vapor. Therefore, the enhancement factor is normally slightly greater than unity for real systems.
The enhancement factor is commonly used to correct the equilibrium vapor pressure of water vapor when empirical relationships, such as those developed by Wexler, Goff, and Gratch, are used to estimate the properties of psychrometric systems.
Buck has reported that, at sea level, the vapor pressure of water in saturated moist air amounts to an increase of approximately 0.5% over the equilibrium vapor pressure of pure water.

Effects
Climate control refers to the control of temperature and relative humidity in buildings, vehicles and other enclosed spaces for the purpose of providing for human comfort, health and safety, and of meeting environmental requirements of machines, sensitive materials (for example, historic) and technical processes.

Climate
While humidity itself is a climate variable, it also affects other climate variables. Environmental humidity is affected by winds and by rainfall.
The most humid cities on Earth are generally located closer to the equator, near coastal regions. Cities in parts of Asia and Oceania are among the most humid. Bangkok, Ho Chi Minh City, Kuala Lumpur, Hong Kong, Manila, Jakarta, Naha, Singapore, Kaohsiung and Taipei have very high humidity most or all year round because of their proximity to water bodies and the equator and often overcast weather. 
Some places experience extreme humidity during their rainy seasons combined with warmth giving the feel of a lukewarm sauna, such as Kolkata, Chennai and Kochi in India, and Lahore in Pakistan. Sukkur city located on the Indus River in Pakistan has some of the highest and most uncomfortable dew points in the country, frequently exceeding 30 °C (86 °F) in the monsoon season.
High temperatures combine with the high dew point to create heat index in excess of 65 °C (149 °F). Darwin experiences an extremely humid wet season from December to April. Houston, Miami, San Diego, Osaka, Shanghai, Shenzhen and Tokyo also have an extreme humid period in their summer months. During the South-west and North-east Monsoon seasons (respectively, late May to September and November to March), expect heavy rains and a relatively high humidity post-rainfall. 
Outside the monsoon seasons, humidity is high (in comparison to countries further from the Equator), but completely sunny days abound. In cooler places such as Northern Tasmania, Australia, high humidity is experienced all year due to the ocean between mainland Australia and Tasmania. In the summer the hot dry air is absorbed by this ocean and the temperature rarely climbs above 35 °C (95 °F).

Global climate
Humidity affects the energy budget and thereby influences temperatures in two major ways. First, water vapor in the atmosphere contains "latent" energy. During transpiration or evaporation, this latent heat is removed from surface liquid, cooling the Earth's surface. This is the biggest non-radiative cooling effect at the surface. It compensates for roughly 70% of the average net radiative warming at the surface.
Second, water vapor is the most abundant of all greenhouse gases. Water vapor, like a green lens that allows green light to pass through it but absorbs red light, is a "selective absorber". Like the other greenhouse gasses, water vapor is transparent to most solar energy. However, it absorbs the infrared energy emitted (radiated) upward by the Earth's surface, which is the reason that humid areas experience very little nocturnal cooling but dry desert regions cool considerably at night. This selective absorption causes the greenhouse effect. It raises the surface temperature substantially above its theoretical radiative equilibrium temperature with the sun, and water vapor is the cause of more of this warming than any other greenhouse gas.
Unlike most other greenhouse gases, however, water is not merely below its boiling point in all regions of the Earth, but below its freezing point at many altitudes.  As a condensible greenhouse gas, it precipitates, with a much lower scale height and shorter atmospheric lifetime — weeks instead of decades.  Without other greenhouse gases, Earth's blackbody temperature, below the freezing point of water, would cause water vapor to be removed from the atmosphere.  Water vapor is thus a "slave" to the non-condensible greenhouse gases.

Animal and plant life
Humidity is one of the fundamental abiotic factors that defines any habitat (the tundra, wetlands, and the desert are a few examples), and is a determinant of which animals and plants can thrive in a given environment.
The human body dissipates heat through perspiration and its evaporation. Heat convection, to the surrounding air, and thermal radiation are the primary modes of heat transport from the body. Under conditions of high humidity, the rate of evaporation of sweat from the skin decreases. Also, if the atmosphere is as warm or warmer than the skin during times of high humidity, blood brought to the body surface cannot dissipate heat by conduction to the air. With so much blood going to the external surface of the body, less goes to the active muscles, the brain, and other internal organs. Physical strength declines, and fatigue occurs sooner than it would otherwise. Alertness and mental capacity also may be affected, resulting in heat stroke or hyperthermia.
Domesticated plants and animals (e.g. lizards) require regular upkeep of humidity percent when grown in-home and container conditions, for optimal thriving environment.

Human comfort
Although humidity is an important factor for thermal comfort, humans are more sensitive to variations in temperature than they are to changes in relative humidity. Humidity has a small effect on thermal comfort outdoors when air temperatures are low, a slightly more pronounced effect at moderate air temperatures, and a much stronger influence at higher air temperatures.
Humans are sensitive to humid air because the human body uses evaporative cooling as the primary mechanism to regulate temperature. Under humid conditions, the rate at which perspiration evaporates on the skin is lower than it would be under arid conditions. Because humans perceive the rate of heat transfer from the body rather than temperature itself, we feel warmer when the relative humidity is high than when it is low.
Humans can be comfortable within a wide range of humidities depending on the temperature—from 30 to 70%—but ideally not above the Absolute (60 °F Dew Point), between 40% and 60%.  In general, higher temperatures will require lower humidities to achieve thermal comfort compared to lower temperatures, with all other factors held constant. For example, with clothing level = 1, metabolic rate = 1.1, and air speed 0.1 m/s, a change in air temperature and mean radiant temperature from 20 °C to 24 °C would lower the maximum acceptable relative humidity from 100% to 65% to maintain thermal comfort conditions. The CBE Thermal Comfort Tool can be used to demonstrate the effect of relative humidity for specific thermal comfort conditions and it can be used to demonstrate compliance with ASHRAE Standard 55–2017.
Some people experience difficulty breathing in humid environments. Some cases may possibly be related to respiratory conditions such as asthma, while others may be the product of anxiety. Affected people will often hyperventilate in response, causing sensations of numbness, faintness, and loss of concentration, among others.
Very low humidity can create discomfort, respiratory problems, and aggravate allergies in some individuals. Low humidity causes tissue lining nasal passages to dry, crack and become more susceptible to penetration of rhinovirus cold viruses. Extremely low (below 20 %) relative humidities may also cause eye irritation. The use of a humidifier in homes, especially bedrooms, can help with these symptoms. Indoor relative humidities kept above 30% reduce the likelihood of the occupant's nasal passages drying out, especially in winter.
Air conditioning reduces discomfort by reducing not just temperature but humidity as well. Heating cold outdoor air can decrease relative humidity levels indoors to below 30%. According to ASHRAE Standard 55-2017: Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy, indoor thermal comfort can be achieved through the PMV method with relative humidities ranging from 0% to 100%, depending on the levels of the other factors contributing to thermal comfort. However, the recommended range of indoor relative humidity in air conditioned buildings is generally 30–60%.

Human health
Higher humidity reduces the infectivity of aerosolized influenza virus. A study concluded, "Maintaining indoor relative humidity >40% will significantly reduce the infectivity of aerosolized virus."
Excess moisture in buildings expose occupants to fungal spores, cell fragments, or mycotoxins. Infants in homes with mold have a much greater risk of developing asthma and allergic rhinitis. More than half of adult workers in moldy/humid buildings develop nasal or sinus symptoms due to mold exposure.
Mucociliary clearance in the respiratory tract is also hindered by low humidity. One study in dogs found that mucus transport was lower at an absolute humidity of 9 g/m3 than at 30 g/m3.
Increased humidity can also lead to changes in total body water that usually leads to moderate weight gain, especially if one is acclimated to working or exercising in hot and humid weather.

Building construction
Common construction methods often produce building enclosures with a poor thermal boundary, requiring an insulation and air barrier system designed to retain indoor environmental conditions while resisting external environmental conditions.  The energy-efficient, heavily sealed architecture introduced in the 20th century also sealed off the movement of moisture, and this has resulted in a secondary problem of condensation forming in and around walls, which encourages the development of mold and mildew. Additionally, buildings with foundations not properly sealed will allow water to flow through the walls due to capillary action of pores found in masonry products. Solutions for energy-efficient buildings that avoid condensation are a current topic of architecture.
For climate control in buildings using HVAC systems, the key is to maintain the relative humidity at a comfortable range—low enough to be comfortable but high enough to avoid problems associated with very dry air.
When the temperature is high and the relative humidity is low, evaporation of water is rapid; soil dries, wet clothes hung on a line or rack dry quickly, and perspiration readily evaporates from the skin. Wooden furniture can shrink, causing the paint that covers these surfaces to fracture.
When the temperature is low and the relative humidity is high, evaporation of water is slow. When relative humidity approaches 100%, condensation can occur on surfaces, leading to problems with mold, corrosion, decay, and other moisture-related deterioration. Condensation can pose a safety risk as it can promote the growth of mold and wood rot as well as possibly freezing emergency exits shut. 
Certain production and technical processes and treatments in factories, laboratories, hospitals, and other facilities require specific relative humidity levels to be maintained using humidifiers, dehumidifiers and associated control systems.

Vehicles
The basic principles for buildings, above, also apply to vehicles. In addition, there may be safety considerations. For instance, high humidity inside a vehicle can lead to problems of condensation, such as misting of windshields and shorting of electrical components. In vehicles and pressure vessels such as pressurized airliners, submersibles and spacecraft, these considerations may be critical to safety, and complex environmental control systems including equipment to maintain pressure are needed.

Aviation
Airliners operate with low internal relative humidity, often under 20%, especially on long flights. The low humidity is a consequence of drawing in the very cold air with a low absolute humidity, which is found at airliner cruising altitudes. Subsequent warming of this air lowers its relative humidity. This causes discomfort such as sore eyes, dry skin, and drying out of mucosa, but humidifiers are not employed to raise it to comfortable mid-range levels because the volume of water required to be carried on board can be a significant weight penalty. As airliners descend from colder altitudes into warmer air, perhaps even flying through clouds a few thousand feet above the ground, the ambient relative humidity can increase dramatically. 
Some of this moist air is usually drawn into the pressurized aircraft cabin and into other non-pressurized areas of the aircraft and condenses on the cold aircraft skin. Liquid water can usually be seen running along the aircraft skin, both on the inside and outside of the cabin. Because of the drastic changes in relative humidity inside the vehicle, components must be qualified to operate in those environments. The recommended environmental qualifications for most commercial aircraft components is listed in RTCA DO-160.
Cold, humid air can promote the formation of ice, which is a danger to aircraft as it affects the wing profile and increases weight. Naturally aspirated internal combustion engines have a further danger of ice forming inside the carburetor. Aviation weather reports (METARs) therefore include an indication of relative humidity, usually in the form of the dew point.
Pilots must take humidity into account when calculating takeoff distances, because high humidity requires longer runways and will decrease climb performance.
Density altitude is the altitude relative to the standard atmosphere conditions (International Standard Atmosphere) at which the air density would be equal to the indicated air density at the place of observation, or, in other words, the height when measured in terms of the density of the air rather than the distance from the ground. "Density Altitude" is the pressure altitude adjusted for non-standard temperature.
An increase in temperature, and, to a much lesser degree, humidity, will cause an increase in density altitude. Thus, in hot and humid conditions, the density altitude at a particular location may be significantly higher than the true altitude.

Electronics
Electronic devices are often rated to operate only under certain humidity conditions (e.g., 10% to 90%). The optimal humidity for electronic devices is 30% to 65%. At the top end of the range, moisture may increase the conductivity of permeable insulators leading to malfunction. Too low humidity may make materials brittle. A particular danger to electronic items, regardless of the stated operating humidity range, is condensation. When an electronic item is moved from a cold place (e.g., garage, car, shed, air conditioned space in the tropics) to a warm humid place (house, outside tropics), condensation may coat circuit boards and other insulators, leading to short circuit inside the equipment. Such short circuits may cause substantial permanent damage if the equipment is powered on before the condensation has evaporated. A similar condensation effect can often be observed when a person wearing glasses comes in from the cold (i.e. the glasses become foggy). 
It is advisable to allow electronic equipment to acclimatise for several hours, after being brought in from the cold, before powering on. Some electronic devices can detect such a change and indicate, when plugged in and usually with a small droplet symbol, that they cannot be used until the risk from condensation has passed. In situations where time is critical, increasing air flow through the device's internals, such as removing the side panel from a PC case and directing a fan to blow into the case, will significantly reduce the time needed to acclimatise to the new environment.
In contrast, a very low humidity level favors the build-up of static electricity, which may result in spontaneous shutdown of computers when discharges occur. Apart from spurious erratic function, electrostatic discharges can cause dielectric breakdown in solid-state devices, resulting in irreversible damage. Data centers often monitor relative humidity levels for these reasons.

Industry
High humidity can often have a negative effect on the capacity of chemical plants and refineries that use furnaces as part of a certain processes (e.g., steam reforming, wet sulfuric acid processes). For example, because humidity reduces ambient oxygen concentrations (dry air is typically 20.9% oxygen, but at 100% relative humidity the air is 20.4% oxygen), flue gas fans must intake air at a higher rate than would otherwise be required to maintain the same firing rate.

Baking
High humidity in the oven, represented by an elevated wet-bulb temperature, increases the thermal conductivity of the air around the baked item, leading to a quicker baking process or even burning. Conversely, low humidity slows the baking process down.

Other important facts
At 100% relative humidity, air is saturated and at its dew point: the water vapor pressure would permit neither evaporation of nearby liquid water nor condensation to grow the nearby water; neither sublimation of nearby ice nor deposition to grow the nearby ice.
Relative humidity can exceed 100%, in which case the air is supersaturated.  Cloud formation requires supersaturated air. Cloud condensation nuclei lower the level of supersaturation required to form fogs and clouds – in the absence of nuclei around which droplets or ice can form, a higher level of supersaturation is required for these droplets or ice crystals to form spontaneously.  In the Wilson cloud chamber, which is used in nuclear physics experiments, a state of supersaturation is created within the chamber, and moving subatomic particles act as condensation nuclei so trails of fog show the paths of those particles.
For a given dew point and its corresponding absolute humidity, the relative humidity will change inversely, albeit nonlinearly, with the temperature. This is because the vapor pressure of water increases with temperature—the operative principle behind everything from hair dryers to dehumidifiers.
Due to the increasing potential for a higher water vapor partial pressure at higher air temperatures, the water content of air at sea level can get as high as 3% by mass at 30 °C (86 °F) compared to no more than about 0.5% by mass at 0 °C (32 °F). This explains the low levels (in the absence of measures to add moisture) of humidity in heated structures during winter, resulting in dry skin, itchy eyes, and persistence of static electric charges. Even with saturation (100% relative humidity) outdoors, heating of infiltrated outside air that comes indoors raises its moisture capacity, which lowers relative humidity and increases evaporation rates from moist surfaces indoors, including human bodies and household plants.
Similarly, during summer in humid climates a great deal of liquid water condenses from air cooled in air conditioners. Warmer air is cooled below its dew point, and the excess water vapor condenses. This phenomenon is the same as that which causes water droplets to form on the outside of a cup containing an ice-cold drink.
A useful rule of thumb is that the maximum absolute humidity doubles for every 20 °F (11 °C) increase in temperature. Thus, the relative humidity will drop by a factor of 2 for each 20 °F (11 °C) increase in temperature, assuming conservation of absolute moisture. For example, in the range of normal temperatures, air at 68 °F (20 °C) and 50% relative humidity will become saturated if cooled to 50 °F (10 °C), its dew point, and 41 °F (5 °C) air at 80% relative humidity warmed to 68 °F (20 °C) will have a relative humidity of only 29% and feel dry. By comparison, thermal comfort standard ASHRAE 55 requires systems designed to control humidity to maintain a dew point of 16.8 °C (62.2 °F) though no lower humidity limit is established.
Water vapor is a lighter gas than other gaseous components of air at the same temperature, so humid air will tend to rise by natural convection. This is a mechanism behind thunderstorms and other weather phenomena. Relative humidity is often mentioned in weather forecasts and reports, as it is an indicator of the likelihood of dew, or fog. In hot summer weather, it also increases the apparent temperature to humans (and other animals) by hindering the evaporation of perspiration from the skin as the relative humidity rises. This effect is calculated as the heat index or humidex.
A device used to measure humidity is called a hygrometer; one used to regulate it is called a humidistat, or sometimes hygrostat. These are analogous to a thermometer and thermostat for temperature, respectively.
The field concerned with the study of physical and thermodynamic properties of gas–vapor mixtures is named psychrometrics.

Relationship between absolute humidity, relative humidity, and temperature
References
Citations
General sources
Further reading
Himmelblau, David M. (1989). Basic Principles And Calculations In Chemical Engineering. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-066572-X.
Lide, David (2005). CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (85 ed.). CRC Press. ISBN 9780849304859.
Perry, R.H.; Green, D.W (1997). Perry's Chemical Engineers' Handbook (7th ed.). McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-049841-5.

External links

Current map of global relative humidity

================================================================================

# ASHRAE

The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE  ASH-ray) is an American professional association seeking to advance heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration (HVAC&R) systems design and construction. ASHRAE has over 50,000 members in more than 130 countries worldwide. 
ASHRAE's members comprise building services engineers, architects, mechanical contractors, building owners, equipment manufacturers' employees, and others concerned with the design and construction of HVAC&R systems in buildings. The society funds research projects, offers continuing education programs, and develops and publishes technical standards to improve building services engineering, energy efficiency, indoor air quality, and sustainable development.

History
ASHRAE was founded in 1894 at a meeting of engineers in New York City, formerly headquartered at 345 East 47th Street (the United Engineering Center), and has held an annual meeting since 1895. Until 1954 it was known as the American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers (ASHVE); in that year it changed its name to the American Society of Heating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHAE). Its current name and organization came from the 1959 merger of ASHAE and the American Society of Refrigerating Engineers (ASRE).
Despite having 'American' in its name, ASHRAE is a global organization, holding international events. In 2012, it rebranded itself with a new logo and tagline: "Shaping Tomorrow's Built Environment Today".

Publications
The ASHRAE Handbook is a four-volume resource for HVAC&R technology and is available in both print and electronic versions. The volumes are Fundamentals, HVAC Applications, HVAC Systems and Equipment, and Refrigeration. One of the four volumes is updated each year.
ASHRAE also publishes a set of standards and guidelines relating to HVAC systems and issues, that are often referenced in building codes and used by consulting engineers, mechanical contractors, architects, and government agencies. These standards are periodically reviewed, revised and republished.
Examples of some ASHRAE Standards are:

Standard 34 – Designation and Safety Classification of Refrigerants
Standard 55 – Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy
Standard 62.1 – Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality (versions: 2001 and earlier as "62", 2004 and beyond as "62.1")
Standard 62.2 – Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in Low-Rise Residential Buildings
Standard 90.1 – Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings – The IESNA is a joint sponsor of this standard.
Standard 135 – BACnet - A Data Communication Protocol for Building Automation and Control Networks
Standard 188 – Legionellosis: Risk Management for Building Water Systems
Standard 189.1 – Standard for the Design of High Performance, Green Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings
Standard 241 - Control of Infectious Aerosols
The society also publishes two magazines: the ASHRAE Journal is issued monthly, and High Performing Buildings Magazine is published quarterly. They contain articles on related technology, information on upcoming meetings, editorials, and case studies of various well-performing buildings.
ASHRAE also publishes books, ASHRAE Transactions, and the International Journal of HVAC&R Research.

Legislation
ASHRAE supported the Streamlining Energy Efficiency for Schools Act of 2014 (H.R. 4092; 113th Congress), a bill that would require the United States Department of Energy to establish a centralized clearinghouse to disseminate information on federal programs, incentives, and mechanisms for financing energy-efficient retrofits and upgrades at schools.

Society awards
ASHRAE offers six categories of awards: achievement awards to recognize personal honors; personal awards for general and specific society activities; paper awards; society awards for groups or chapters; chapters and regional awards.

ASHRAE Fellows
ASHRAE Fellow is a Membership Grade of Distinction conferred by The College of Fellows of ASHRAE, Inc. to an ASHRAE member with significant publications or innovations and distinguished scientific and engineering background in the fields of heating, refrigeration, air conditioning, ventilation. The ASHRAE Fellow membership grade is the highest elected grade in ASHRAE.

Hall of Fame
ASHRAE has a Hall of Fame honoring "deceased members who have made milestone contributions to the growth of ASHRAE-related technology. Individuals inducted into the Hall of Fame must have been an ASHRAE member (any grade) or a member of a predecessor Society and must have shown evidence of distinction in the Society, either technically or academically."

Headquarters renewal
To demonstrate the Society's commitment to sustainability, ASHRAE renovated its previous headquarters building in Atlanta, Ga. After the renovation and occupancy in June 2008, the building received many awards, including an Energy Star rating with a score of 95, a Platinum Certification from USGBC's LEED program, and four Green Globes from the Green Building Initiative. The current site energy use intensity (EUI) is 35.8 kBtu/Sqft (411 MJ/m2), a 60 percent reduction from the pre-renovation value. The renovation included the use of a dedicated outdoor air supply (DOAS) system with energy recovery and humidity control; a ground-source heat pump system (GSHP); and variable refrigerant flow systems with heat recovery. The building also serves as a live case study. A web-based user interface allowed researchers around the world to extract data from the building to study factors such as energy use and electric power demand, water consumption and indoor air quality.
In 2018, ASHRAE decided to move their world headquarters, settling on retrofitting a 1970s-era building in Peachtree Corners, suburban Atlanta. Completed in 2022, the building has been renovated to comply with ASHRAE's own standards, including ASHRAE 90.1, and the organization has the goal of operating the building at net-zero energy, powered by a large on-site solar array.

See also
ASHRAE 90.1
ASHRAE 55
ASHRAE Handbook
Building services engineering
Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers
Chartered Association of Building Engineers
Ralph G. Nevins
Sick building syndrome
Uniform Codes
Uniform Mechanical Code

References
External links
Official website 
ASHRAE publications
The AHR Expo - Co-Sponsored by ASHRAE and ARI
ASHRAE Building Energy Quotient Program Archived 2018-10-25 at the Wayback Machine

================================================================================

# ASHRAE Handbook

The ASHRAE Handbook is the four-volume flagship publication of the nonprofit technical organization ASHRAE (American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers).  This Handbook is considered  the most comprehensive and authoritative repository of practical knowledge on the various topics that form the field of heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, and refrigeration (HVAC&R).
The four volumes are Fundamentals, Refrigeration, HVAC Applications ("Applications"), and HVAC Systems and Equipment ("Systems and Equipment").  Members of ASHRAE receive the current volume, in both print and CD-ROM form, each year as a basic membership benefit.  An enhanced electronic version, known as ASHRAE Handbook Online is a web-based version updated annually that contains the four latest volumes as well as extra content such as calculations, demonstration videos, and spreadsheets.  The various versions of the Handbook are typically available to the public via technical, and other, libraries and bookstores.

History
The ASHRAE Handbook has had a variety of titles.  It began in 1922 as the ASH&VE Guide.  In 1973 it became the ASHRAE Handbook, and in 1985 separate publication of inch-pound (I-P) and international system (SI) units versions of the volumes began.  The current publisher of record is W. Stephen Comstock, and the Editor is Mark S. Owen.  The Handbook is published by ASHRAE from its headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia.

Review and Revision
The Handbook's content is created and modified by volunteers via ASHRAE's many Technical Committees (TCs), and then edited and formatted by professional staff at ASHRAE.  For example, three chapters, in three different volumes, are maintained by TC 5.3, Room Air Distribution.  Each chapter within a particular volume is reviewed and revised in a repeating four-year cycle; one volume is printed each year.  In the summer of 2017 the new Fundamentals' volume was released.  ASHRAE's Handbook Committee maintains an Authors and Revisers Guide, which can be obtained freely via the Handbook portion of the ASHRAE Web site.
While each new or revised chapter manuscript is to be reviewed for technical content by each TC voting and corresponding member before publication, there are often many other pre- and post-publication reviewers.  For example, members of the Society's Handbook Committee and the College of Fellows review chapters each year.  Reviews, from basic comments to detailed new content, are encouraged from all users of the Handbook and may be submitted through an online commenting system.

Notes
References
External links
ASHRAE's Web site

================================================================================

# ASTM International

ASTM International, formerly known as American Society for Testing and Materials, is a standards organization that develops and publishes voluntary consensus technical international standards for a wide range of materials, products, systems and services. Some 12,575 apply globally. The headquarters is in West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania, about 5 mi (8.0 km) northwest of Philadelphia. It was founded in 1902 as the American Section of the International Association for Testing Materials.
In addition to its traditional standards work, ASTM operates several global initiatives advancing additive manufacturing, advanced manufacturing, and emerging technologies, including the Additive Manufacturing Center of Excellence (AM CoE), the acquisition of Wohlers Associates for market intelligence and advisory services, and the NIST-funded Standardization Center of Excellence (SCOE).

History
In 1898, a group of scientists and engineers, led by chemist, industry leader, and proponent of standardization Charles Dudley, formed  the American Society for Testing Material (ASTM) to address the frequent rail breaks affecting the fast-growing railroad industry. The group developed a standard for the steel used to fabricate rails.
In 1961 the name "American Society for Testing and Materials" was adopted.
In 2001, ASTM officially changed its name to "ASTM International" and added the tagline "Standards Worldwide".
In 2014, the tagline changed to "Helping our World Work better." ASTM International had offices in Belgium, Canada, China, Peru, Washington, D.C., and West Conshohocken, PA.
In April 2016, the Safety Equipment Institute (SEI) became a subsidiary of ASTM International.  SEI is an accredited third-party certification organization that certifies various types of PPE to industry consensus standards.
On June 9, 2022, it was announced that the European Committee for Standardization (CEN) and ASTM International agreed to extend and expand a Technical Cooperation Agreement from 2019.

Membership and organization
Membership in the organization is open to anyone interested in its activities.  Standards are developed within committees, and new committees are formed as needed, upon request of interested members. Membership in most committees is voluntary and is initiated by the member's request, not by appointment or invitation.
Members are classified as users, producers, consumers, and "general interest". The latter includes academics and consultants. Users include industry users, who may be producers in the context of other technical commodities, and end-users such as consumers. To meet the requirements of antitrust laws, producers must constitute less than 50% of every committee or subcommittee, and votes are limited to one per producer company. Because of these restrictions, there can be a substantial waiting-list of producers seeking organizational memberships on the more popular committees. Members can participate without a formal vote and their input will be fully considered.
As of 2015, ASTM has more than 30,000 members, including over 1,150 organizational members, from more than 140 countries. The members serve on one or more of 140+ ASTM Technical Committees. ASTM International has several awards for contributions to standards authorship, including the ASTM International Award of Merit (the organization's highest award) ASTM International is classified by the United States Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.

Additive Manufacturing Center of Excellence (AM CoE)
In 2018, ASTM International launched the Additive Manufacturing Center of Excellence (AM CoE), a global initiative uniting industry, government, and academia to accelerate research, development, standardization, certification, and industrialization of additive manufacturing (AM). Headquartered in Washington, D.C., with a network of experts across the Americas, Europe, and Asia, the AM CoE focuses on bridging the gap between cutting-edge research and consensus-based standards.
The AM CoE’s main pillars include:

Targeted research and development (R&D) projects aligned to standards development;
Certification programs for AM quality management, machine operator competency, and facility safety;
Education and workforce development through certificate programs, workshops, webinars, and e-learning;
The Consortium for Materials Data and Standardization (CMDS), advancing high-quality AM materials datasets and best practices;
Organizing the International Conference on Advanced Manufacturing (ICAM), ASTM’s flagship annual event for AM standardization and qualification.
These initiatives aim to close standardization gaps, support qualification frameworks, and promote the broader adoption of additive manufacturing technologies across the aerospace, defense industry, medical devices, automotive industry, and energy sectors.

Acquisition of Wohlers Associates
In 2021, ASTM International acquired Wohlers Associates, a globally recognized consulting firm and market intelligence provider in additive manufacturing and 3D printing. Known for its authoritative Wohlers Report, Wohlers Associates delivers deep industry analysis, technology trends, and forecasts covering hardware, software, materials, and applications across the AM ecosystem.
Operating within ASTM’s Advanced Manufacturing Division, Wohlers Associates continues to provide:

Advisory services for industry, government, and investors;
Market intelligence reports including the Wohlers Report and specialized sector analyses;
Technical expertise contributing to standards development and qualification frameworks.

Standardization Center of Excellence (SCOE)
Funded by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the Standardization Center of Excellence (SCOE) is a more recent initiative under ASTM International. SCOE focuses on advancing innovation and standardization for critical and emerging technologies, offering a coordinated framework connecting R&D, standards development, workforce readiness, and regulatory alignment.
The SCOE enables cross-industry collaboration to ensure that next-generation technologies are developed, validated, and deployed with trusted, globally harmonized standards.

Standards compliance
ASTM International has no role in requiring or enforcing compliance with its standards. The standards may become mandatory when referenced by an external contract, corporation, regulation, law, or government.
In the United States, ASTM standards have been adopted by incorporation or reference in many federal, state, and municipal government regulations. The 1995 National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act requires the Federal government to use privately developed consensus standards whenever possible. The Act reflects what had long been recommended as best practice within the Federal government. Other governments, including state and foreign, have also referenced ASTM standards.
Corporations doing international business may choose to reference an ASTM standard. All toys sold in the United States must meet the safety requirements of ASTM F963, Standard Consumer Safety Specification for Toy Safety, as part of the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act (CPSIA) of 2008. The law makes the ASTM F963 standard a mandatory requirement for toys while the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) studies the standard's effectiveness and issues final consumer guidelines for toy safety.

See also
International Organization for Standardization
Materials property
Pt/Co scale
Technical standard

References
External links
 Media related to ASTM international at Wikimedia Commons
Official website
Standards and Publications

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Argo's StatusClick the map to see where Argo floats have recently come to the surface and the temperature in the top 2000m of the world ocean.
Argo's Status
Click the map to see where Argo floats have recently come to the surface and the temperature in the top 2000m of the world ocean.
Argo and the warming oceanClick on the picture of an Argo float to learn more about how Argo data are helping us understand the changing ocean.
Argo and the warming ocean
Click on the picture of an Argo float to learn more about how Argo data are helping us understand the changing ocean.
What is an Argo float and how does it work?Click on the picture to learn about Argo floats and their mission.
What is an Argo float and how does it work?
Click on the picture to learn about Argo floats and their mission.
What is Argo?
Argo is an international program that collects information from inside the ocean using a fleet of robotic instruments that drift with the ocean currents and move up and down between the surface and a mid-water level. Each instrument (float) spends almost all its life below the surface. The name Argo was chosen because the array of floats works in partnership with the Jason earth observing satellites that measure the shape of the ocean surface. (In Greek mythology, Jason sailed on his shipArgoin search of the golden fleece).Learn more about Argo
Data Access
Learn how to access Argo data whether you're a scientist looking to use it in your resesarch, a student learning about the ocean or a curious member of the public.
Data Visualizations
Want to see Argo data without having to actually plot it yourself?  Check out these different websites and viewers that show Argo data with a few clicks of a button.
Science highlights
One of Argo's key objectives is to observe ocean data related to climate change.  Find out how it's doing on assessing ocean temperatures, the water cycle, and sea level rise.
Movies & Pictures
Watch Argo floats being prepared for deployment in a lab and scientists launching floats.  Take a peak inside floats and compare the different models.
Float Technology
The sensors on Argo floats and the floats themselves are what make the Argo Program possible.  Learn about the latest developments with sensors and floats.
Frequently Asked Questions
Find answers to questions like how Argo got its name, what powers floats and how long they live.
Argo celebrates 20 years of observing the ocean
What has Argo taught us, what makes it successful, and what does it hope to accomplish in the future?
News
News
Float deployed in Gulf of Guinea
GO-BGC Argo float deployed from E/V Nautilus
First Portuguese float deployed
Meetings
Meetings
ADMT-26 registration is open
ADMT-26 webpage
AST-26 Meeting Report is published
Technical Updates
Technical Updates
RBR prepared background document regarding deployment pause request
RBR asks Argo to stop deploying CTDs
changes coming to GDACs on 30 June 2025
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/about/history-of-argo/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Argo’s history
APEX float deployment
Argo grew out of the 1990’s WOCE project which set out to collect an unprecedented set of observations.  Part of the WOCE project included collecting data on ocean currents at about 1000 m throughout the oceans. To do this, Russ Davis from Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California and Doug Webb of Webb Research Corporation developed the Autonomous Lagrangian Circulation Explorer (ALACE). (Davis, 1991,Davis et al. 1992). ALACE floats used the principle of neutral buoyancy invented by John Swallow in the mid 1950s to follow the currents at a particular pressure level. (Swallow, 1955). Information on the history of the development and use of neutrally buoyant floats can be found at theUK Argo siteand at theUniversity of Rhode Island.
Each ALACE float rose to the sea surface at regular intervals to allow its position to be fixed by satellite. About 1000 ALACE-type floats were deployed by WOCE and the data from these floats is availableonline.  It was soon realized that as they rose to the surface, the ALACEs could also measure the temperature and salinity of the water through which they rose and towards the end of WOCE, most of the ALACEs carried temperature/salinity/pressure sensors. They became Profiling ALACE (PALACE) floats. (Davis et al 2001).
Two documents prepared simultaneously in 1998 by Dean Roemmich of Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Ray Schmitt of Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution explore the potential of using profiling floats to monitor the ocean:
“A Proposal for Global Ocean Observations for Climate: the Array for Real-time Geostrophic Oceanography (ARGO)” (Roemmich)
“A program for Global Ocean SAlinity MonitORing (GOSAMOR)” (Schmitt)
Early in 1998, the International Steering Team forGODAEendorsed the broad concept of a global array of profiling floats and undertook to develop a plan.CLIVARalso considered these two proposals and gave them high priority in its implementation plan.
A scientific team came together under the chairmanship of Dean Roemmich and prepared two documents on Argo:
On the Design and Implementation of Argo – An initial plan for a global array of profiling floats
Argo: The Global Array of Profiling Floats
Thus the Argo project was born.
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/about/observing-system/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Argo’s role in the observing system
Argo and the ocean observing system
Argo is part of the Global Climate Observing System and Global Ocean Observing System OceanView (GCOS,GOOS).  In addition, Argo contributes to theWCRP‘s Climate Variability and Predictability Experiment (CLIVAR) project whose mission is to enable a better understanding of climate to the benefit of society and the environment in which we live.  Argo also is a major contributor to OceanPredict (OceanPredict) whose mission is to improve global and regional ocean analysis and forecasting systems.
Together, the Argo andJason satellite altimeter datasets are assimilated into computer models developed by GODAE OceanPredict which improves our ability to forecast ocean climate. For the first time, the physical state of the upper ocean is being systematically measured and the data assimilated in near real-time into computer models.  Argo builds on other upper-ocean ocean observingnetworks, extending their coverage in space and time, their depth range and accuracy, and enhancing them through the addition of salinity and velocity measurements.  Argo is not confined to major shipping routes which can vary with season as the other upper-ocean observing networks are. Instead, the global array of 4,000 floats is distributed roughly every 3 degrees (300km) and observes the ocean year round. Argo is the sole source of global subsurface datasets used in all ocean data assimilation models and reanalyses.
Limited by ship endurance(100 per month)
Few at high latitude in winter
Typically along lines
Along shipping routes
Avoid high latitude in winter
Many areas unsampled
Seasonal ice free areas deeper than 2000m
Ship based CTD measurements
CTD cast from a ship
Even with Argo profiles covering more area year round, data from ship-based CTDs is still vital because it is extremely accurate and goes all the way to the bottom of the ocean.  This ship-based CTD data is used to calibrate all Argo data, especially biogeochemical and deeper Argo data, as well as sensors in development.
The World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) was an attempt in the 1990’s to systematically collect 30,000 global ship-based CTDs.  The follow up to that experiment isGO-SHIPwhich officially began in 2007 and continues to collect high quality CTD data along 61 lines repeated each decade as shown in the map to the right.
Argo and the World Ocean Database
The World Ocean Database, as of January 2018, (shown to the right below) contains 500,000+ profiles deeper than 1000m from the 20th century onwards.  Argo (shown to the left below) has been collecting 100,000+ profiles per year since 2012.
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/about/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
About
What is Argo?
Argo is an international program that measures water properties across the world’s ocean using a fleet of robotic instruments that drift with the ocean currents and move up and down between the surface and a mid-water level.  Each instrument (float) spends almost all its life below the surface.  The name Argo was chosen because the array of floats works in partnership with the Jason earth observing satellites that measure the shape of the ocean surface.  (In Greek mythology Jason sailed on his ship the Argo in search of the golden fleece).
What are its aims?
The data that Argo collects describes the temperature and salinity of the water and some of the floats measure other properties that describe the biology/chemistry of the ocean.  The main reason for collecting these data is to help us understand the oceans’ role in earth’s climate and so be able to make improved estimates of how it will change in the future.
For example, the changes in sea level (once the tides are averaged out) depend partly on the melting of icecaps and partly on the amount of heat stored in the oceans.  Argo’s temperature measurements allow us to calculate how much heat is stored and to monitor from year to year how the distribution of heat changes with depth and from area to area. As ocean heat content increases, sea level rises, just like the mercury in a thermometer. Comparison of Argo’s measurements with the Jason observations continue to give us new insights into how the oceans “work” that can be used to improve climate models.
At present (2024) Argo is collecting 13,000 data profiles each month (400+ a day).  This greatly exceeds the amount of data that can be collected from below the ocean surface by any other method. Argo plans to continue its data collection for as long as those data remain a vital tool for a wide range of ocean applications of which understanding and predicting climate change is but one.
To learn more about Argo’s mission,click here.
How does it work?Each Argo float (costing between $25,000 and $185,000 depending on the individual float’s technical specification) is launched from a ship.  The float’s weight is carefully adjusted so that, as it sinks, it eventually stabilizes at a pre-set level, usually 1 km. Ten days later, an internal battery-driven pump transfers oil between a reservoir inside the float and an external bladder.  This makes the float first descend to 2km and then return to the surface measuring ocean properties as it rises.  The data and the float position are relayed to satellites and then on to receiving stations on shore. The float then sinks again to repeat the 10 day cycle until its batteries are exhausted.To learn more about floats and their cycle,click here.Data deliveryThe float measurements are sent to regional data centres where they are given rigorous quality checks and then passed to two global data centres from where they can be accessed by anyone wishing to use them.  Some users have applications that require rapid access and so Argo aims for most “real-time” data to be available within 12 hrs.  Other applications need a higher-quality version that replaces the real-time data after lengthy comparisons between nearby floats and between float data and information from research ships.  A fundamental rule for Argo is that all data are freely and openly available.To learn more about how to access Argo data,click here.Data visualizationsArgo data are stored in data files that first must be decoded before being readable.  To address this difficulty for non-experts, several websites and web applications have been developed to showcase and interact with Argo data and metadata without having to understand how to decode it.To learn more about the available data visualizations,click here.International collaborationThere is no central funding for Argo.  Each of the 30 countries that operate floats obtains their own national funding to buy floats, prepare and launch them and to process and distribute the data. The Argo Program is managed by teams of scientists and data experts who ensure that the program is run as efficiently and effectively as possible and that standards are maintained at the highest possible level.  Argo is part of the Global Ocean and Global Climate Observing Systems.  The total annual cost of Argo is estimated at least $40 million each year.To learn more about the organization of Argo,click here.TechnologyA Deep SOLO float courtesy of Scripps Institution of OceanographyProfiling floats similar to those used by Argo were first developed in the late 1990s. Float design has continuously incorporated new technologies to improve battery performance, satellite communication and sensor stability. It has also had to keep track of changing demands made on Argo by scientists and by operational weather and climate forecasting centres. Because floats spend almost of their life (which may be as long as 10 years) below the ocean surface and are unable to communicate, the technological challenge of Argo is in many ways greater than that of space science.  Floats are manufactured by commercial companies and by research institutions but all must maintain common and high standards set by the international steering team.  Since Argo started in 2000, innovative new float designs have allowed floats to profile deeper, to work in ice-covered regions and to measure other ocean properties beyond the basic salinity temperature and pressure.To learn more about developing float technology,click here.Environmental impactAll techniques used to obtain information about our environment come with some impact and Argo is no exception.  However, its impact is small and both the float manufacturers and Argo scientists are always looking for ways to reduce that impact.  The vast majority of floats fail when their batteries are exhausted and they continue to drift at depth until they eventually leak and sink to the seabed.  A few fail at the surface and eventually drift to shore where they may be recovered.All deployed floats are considered expendable since the cost and environmental impact of sending ships to find and recover them would be enormous.  Each year the floats that fail add 90kg of copper, 45kg of zinc, 180kg of lithium, 180 kg of lead and 17 tons of aluminum to the ocean.  All these elements occur naturally in all oceans.  The only non-natural annual contributions from “dead” floats are 1.8 tons of plastic, and 9kg of the chemical tributyl tin oxide (TBTO) without which salinity measurements cannot be made to the required accuracy.  As a comparison, it is estimated that hundreds up to ten thousand containers are lost off ships each year.  If 200 containers are lost, with the capacity of holding 60,000 lbs, that would contribute 6,000 tons of garbage each year into the ocean compared to Argo’s less than 2 tons per year.To learn more about Argo’s environmental impact,click here.What has Argo delivered?Fig. 3.15. (a) (black) Monthly averaged global mean sea level observed by satellite altimeters (1993–2018 from the NOAA Laboratory for Satellite Altimetry). (blue) Monthly averaged global ocean mass (2003–Aug 2017 from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment). (red) Monthly averaged global mean steric sea level (2004–18) from the Argo profiling float array. (purple) Mass plus steric. (cyan) Inferred global ocean mass calculated by subtracting global mean steric sea level from global mean sea level. All time series have been smoothed with a 3-month filter. has been described by New York Times science writer Justin Gillis as “one of the scientific triumphs of the age”. The triumphs have been technological and scientific.  The free access to Argo data means that there is wide usage – over 6000 scientific publications have referred to or used Argo data as have almost 500 PhD theses.  To learn more,click here.Two science outcomes are worth highlighting.  Argo has greatly reduced the uncertainty of global heat storage estimates and hence projections of sea level rise.  The changes in salinity monitored by Argo also allow changes in global rainfall patterns to be studied. Finally, the ready access to the data provides an educational resource to give the general public an ability to look inside the ocean.To learn more about Argo’s contributions to science,click hereorherefor a more in-depth look.Curious to learn more?Click hereto learn how Argo’s 20 years of observations have revolutionized the way scientist learn about the ocean.
How does it work?
Each Argo float (costing between $25,000 and $185,000 depending on the individual float’s technical specification) is launched from a ship.  The float’s weight is carefully adjusted so that, as it sinks, it eventually stabilizes at a pre-set level, usually 1 km. Ten days later, an internal battery-driven pump transfers oil between a reservoir inside the float and an external bladder.  This makes the float first descend to 2km and then return to the surface measuring ocean properties as it rises.  The data and the float position are relayed to satellites and then on to receiving stations on shore. The float then sinks again to repeat the 10 day cycle until its batteries are exhausted.
To learn more about floats and their cycle,click here.
Data delivery
The float measurements are sent to regional data centres where they are given rigorous quality checks and then passed to two global data centres from where they can be accessed by anyone wishing to use them.  Some users have applications that require rapid access and so Argo aims for most “real-time” data to be available within 12 hrs.  Other applications need a higher-quality version that replaces the real-time data after lengthy comparisons between nearby floats and between float data and information from research ships.  A fundamental rule for Argo is that all data are freely and openly available.
To learn more about how to access Argo data,click here.
Data visualizations
Argo data are stored in data files that first must be decoded before being readable.  To address this difficulty for non-experts, several websites and web applications have been developed to showcase and interact with Argo data and metadata without having to understand how to decode it.
To learn more about the available data visualizations,click here.
International collaboration
There is no central funding for Argo.  Each of the 30 countries that operate floats obtains their own national funding to buy floats, prepare and launch them and to process and distribute the data. The Argo Program is managed by teams of scientists and data experts who ensure that the program is run as efficiently and effectively as possible and that standards are maintained at the highest possible level.  Argo is part of the Global Ocean and Global Climate Observing Systems.  The total annual cost of Argo is estimated at least $40 million each year.
To learn more about the organization of Argo,click here.
Technology
A Deep SOLO float courtesy of Scripps Institution of Oceanography
Profiling floats similar to those used by Argo were first developed in the late 1990s. Float design has continuously incorporated new technologies to improve battery performance, satellite communication and sensor stability. It has also had to keep track of changing demands made on Argo by scientists and by operational weather and climate forecasting centres. Because floats spend almost of their life (which may be as long as 10 years) below the ocean surface and are unable to communicate, the technological challenge of Argo is in many ways greater than that of space science.  Floats are manufactured by commercial companies and by research institutions but all must maintain common and high standards set by the international steering team.  Since Argo started in 2000, innovative new float designs have allowed floats to profile deeper, to work in ice-covered regions and to measure other ocean properties beyond the basic salinity temperature and pressure.
To learn more about developing float technology,click here.
Environmental impact
All techniques used to obtain information about our environment come with some impact and Argo is no exception.  However, its impact is small and both the float manufacturers and Argo scientists are always looking for ways to reduce that impact.  The vast majority of floats fail when their batteries are exhausted and they continue to drift at depth until they eventually leak and sink to the seabed.  A few fail at the surface and eventually drift to shore where they may be recovered.
All deployed floats are considered expendable since the cost and environmental impact of sending ships to find and recover them would be enormous.  Each year the floats that fail add 90kg of copper, 45kg of zinc, 180kg of lithium, 180 kg of lead and 17 tons of aluminum to the ocean.  All these elements occur naturally in all oceans.  The only non-natural annual contributions from “dead” floats are 1.8 tons of plastic, and 9kg of the chemical tributyl tin oxide (TBTO) without which salinity measurements cannot be made to the required accuracy.  As a comparison, it is estimated that hundreds up to ten thousand containers are lost off ships each year.  If 200 containers are lost, with the capacity of holding 60,000 lbs, that would contribute 6,000 tons of garbage each year into the ocean compared to Argo’s less than 2 tons per year.
To learn more about Argo’s environmental impact,click here.
What has Argo delivered?
Fig. 3.15. (a) (black) Monthly averaged global mean sea level observed by satellite altimeters (1993–2018 from the NOAA Laboratory for Satellite Altimetry). (blue) Monthly averaged global ocean mass (2003–Aug 2017 from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment). (red) Monthly averaged global mean steric sea level (2004–18) from the Argo profiling float array. (purple) Mass plus steric. (cyan) Inferred global ocean mass calculated by subtracting global mean steric sea level from global mean sea level. All time series have been smoothed with a 3-month filter.
Argo has been described by New York Times science writer Justin Gillis as “one of the scientific triumphs of the age”. The triumphs have been technological and scientific.  The free access to Argo data means that there is wide usage – over 6000 scientific publications have referred to or used Argo data as have almost 500 PhD theses.  To learn more,click here.
Two science outcomes are worth highlighting.  Argo has greatly reduced the uncertainty of global heat storage estimates and hence projections of sea level rise.  The changes in salinity monitored by Argo also allow changes in global rainfall patterns to be studied. Finally, the ready access to the data provides an educational resource to give the general public an ability to look inside the ocean.
To learn more about Argo’s contributions to science,click hereorherefor a more in-depth look.
Curious to learn more?
Click hereto learn how Argo’s 20 years of observations have revolutionized the way scientist learn about the ocean.
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/about/mission/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Mission
Why do we need Argo?
We are increasingly concerned about global climate change and its regional impacts. Sea level is rising at an accelerating rate of 3 mm/year, Arctic sea ice cover is shrinking and high latitude areas are warming rapidly. Extreme weather events cause loss of life and enormous burdens on the insurance industry. Globally, 9 of the 10 warmest years since 1880, when instrumental records began, were in the 21st century.
These effects are caused by a mixture of long-term climate change and natural variability. Their impacts are in some cases beneficial (lengthened growing seasons, opening of Arctic shipping routes) and in others adverse (increased coastal flooding, severe droughts, more extreme and frequent heat waves and weather events such as severe tropical cyclones).
Understanding (and eventually predicting) changes in both the atmosphere and ocean are needed to guide international actions, to optimize governments’ policies and to shape industrial strategies. To make those predictions we need improved models of climate and of the entire earth system (including socio-economic factors).
Lack of sustained observations of the atmosphere, oceans and land have hindered the development and validation of climate models. An example from an analysis done prior to Argo concluded that the currents transporting heat northwards in the Atlantic and influencing western European climate had weakened by 30% in the past decade. This result had to be based on justfiveresearch measurements spread over40years. Was this change part of a trend that might lead to a major change in the Atlantic circulation, or due to natural variability that will reverse in the future, or is it an artifact of the limited observations?
In 1999, to combat this lack of data, an innovative step was taken by scientists to greatly improve the collection of observations inside the ocean through increased sampling of old and new quantities and increased coverage in terms of time and area.
That step was Argo.
Argo Design
The design of the Argo array is based on experience from the present observing system, on knowledge of variability from altimeter data, and on requirements for climate and high-resolution ocean models.  As technological advancements have been made, Argo has now expanded its original spatial design to include marginal seas, sea-ice zones, and measuring all the way to the ocean floor.  In addition, there are new sensors that measure biogeochemical parameters and deeper depths.  Several papers have been written describing thearray designs, starting with the initial one and moving towards the current OneArgo array design.
The new array design, OneArgo, is global, full depth and multidisciplinary.  In the future, when fully realized, the Argo array will contain 4000 floats of which 1200 are Deep Argo and 1000 are Biogeochemical Argo (BGC Argo).  All floats combined will provide 100,000+ temperature/salinity (T/S) profiles and velocity measurements per year distributed over the global oceans at an average 3-degree spacing.  At the moment, these expansions are described, but not yet fully implemented.  The BGC Argo Mission and the Deep Argo Mission are in the process of expanding from pilot array to global arrays.
Argo Missions
Core Argo:  floats that measure temperature, salinity, pressure down to 2000m
Deep Argo Mission:  floats that measure temperature, salinity, pressure down to 6000m
BGC-Argo Mission:  floats that measure temperature, salinity, pressure and oxygen, pH, nitrate, chlorophyll, backscatter, irradiance down to 2000m
Polar Argo Mission:  floats that measure temperature, salinity, pressure down to 2000m in the polar regions
Argo’s Objectives
It will provide a quantitative description of the changing state of the upper ocean and the patterns of ocean climate variability from months to decades, including heat and freshwater storage and transport.
The data will enhance the value of satellite altimeter data through measurement of subsurface temperature, salinity, and velocity, with sufficient coverage and resolution to permit interpretation of altimetric sea surface height variability.
Argo data will be used for initializing ocean and coupled ocean-atmosphere forecast models, for data assimilation and for model testing.
A primary focus of Argo is to document seasonal to decadal climate variability and to aid our understanding of its predictability. A wide range of applications for high-quality global ocean analyses is anticipated.
Freely deliver data in near real-time via the Global Data Assembly Centers (GDACs) inBrest, FranceandMonterey, Californiaafter an automated quality control (QC), and in scientifically quality controlled form, delayed mode data within one year of collection.
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/how-do-floats-work/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
How do floats work
What does an Argo float do?
The standard Argo float mission is a 10-day cycle, with most of the float’s time spent drifting along with deep ocean currents, followed by taking a series of measurements as it moves back up (profiles) to the ocean surface. Once the float is on the surface, it gets its location, often through GPS, and then communicates with a satellite to send its data and receive any new mission instructions. For the majority of the Argo fleet, this surface interval is between 15 minutes and one hour. After that, the float sinks to a drift depth of 1000 meters for about 9 days and then the float sinks to its profile depth of 2000 meters before slowly rising to the surface while measuring conductivity, temperature and pressure. This cycle repeats until the float dies usually 4 – 5 years later.
What is in an Argo float?
The different models of Argo floats made around the world have differences in both hardware and software, but mostly operate in a similar fashion.
Courtesy of Michael McClune at Scripps Institution of Oceanography
Antenna– All Argo floats are topped with an antenna that allows them to communicate with satellites to send their data, obtain a position and find out if there is a new mission. Over half of the current Argo fleet use GPS to get their position, and Iridium satellites to transfer the data collected in the last cycle and download new mission instructions if available. Using GPS and Iridium allows floats to spend less time transmitting data at the surface, which reduces the risk of washing up on shore. This advance means that the Argo Program can put floats into marginal seas such as the Mediterranean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico. Using Iridium has also allowed for more data to be sent back, including more observations and more information about the health of the float. Instead of Iridium and GPS, some floats use Systeme Argos to both obtain a position and send back data. Due to data transmission rates and location, these floats usually need to spend 8 – 12 hours on the surface to guarantee a successful data transmission and a position accurate to ~100m.
Conductivity, Temperature, Depth sensor (CTD)– On the top of every Argo float is a CTD which measures temperature within an accuracy of 0.001 degree C , pressure (closely related to depth) within 0.1 dbar, and calculate salinity using conductivity, temperature, and pressure within 0.001 psu (practical salinity units).
Controller– Each Argo float is controlled by a small computer that contains a program to run the float.Internal Reservoir – This area of the float stores oil when it is not inflating the external bladder.
Hydraulic pump– This mechanism moves oil between the internal reservoir and the external bladder to control the buoyancy of the float.
Batteries– Modern Argo floats use lithium batteries to power the pumps, sensors, controller, and communication system. The battery power available is the main limitation on a float’s operational lifetime.
External bladder– Roughly the size of a large grapefruit, this bladder is the mechanism by which Argo floats control their buoyancy or depth in the ocean. Inflating the bladder with oil from the internal reservoir increases the volume of the float without changing the mass, thereby lowering density and causing the float to rise. Pumping oil out of the bladder back into the reservoir will increase the float’s density, allowing it to sink to a specified depth.
To learn more about the different floats used in Argo,click here.  To learn more about data transmission systems,click here.  To learn more about technical innovations that have helped Argo succeed, clickhere.
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/data/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Argo data
Argo data sources
There are many sources of Argo data depending on the desired format, source and application.  Browse through the different options below to learn more.  Some of the ways listed below are maintained by the Argo Program andArgo Data Management Team, while some are created and hosted by others, but highlighted here.
If you use any Argo data, pleasecitethe Argo DOI.
Argo data files
Argo profile, trajectory, meta and technical data files
Real time and delayed mode quality controlled data available
Maintained by Argo Data Management Team
Served at Argo GDACs via ftp, http, rsync, DOI, errdap, thredds
Data in NetCDF format
Selection tools available
Auxiliary directoryat GDACs to access experimental data
Argo Archiveat NCEI
GTS data stream
Real time Argo data go out on the GTS for operational centers to gather within 12 hours of the observation for use in their forecasting and prediction models.
Core Argo profiles only
Real time quality control only
BUFR format with QC flags
Maintained by Argo Data Management Team
Software tools
An array of tools have been developed aimed at both beginners and experts to help users gather, manipulate, visualize and quality control Argo data.
Software tools
Quick start guide
Data FAQ
Argo DMQC GitHub repository
Argo RTQC GitHub repository
EuroArgo GitHub repository
Developed by both people involved in Argo and those outside of it
Argo data products
Products using Argo data and sometimes other data sources
Gridded products of temperature, salinity, mixed layer depth, etc.
Curated profile collections
Velocity products
data often in NetCDF format, sometimes in other formats
Not maintained by Argo Data Management Team
Visualizations and web applications
This collection of websites and tools allow non-scientists and scientists alike to quickly look at Argo data plots.  Items listed below are not present in all tools.
View Argo profile, trajectory, meta, technical and gridded data
Save Argo data and/or plots
Hosted by people directly involved in Argo and by people outside of Argo
Access Argo profile data in JSON
API access to curated Argo profile database
Monitor Argo statistics
Model outputs and reanalysis products
Argo is the primary source of subsurface ocean data at operational centers around the world.  Find out which centers assimilate data and what types of data are available.
Not maintained by Argo
Data often in NetCDF format
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/data/data-visualizations/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Data visualizations
Sometimes accessing and decoding the freely available Argo data files in NetCDF format can be difficult (see thequick start guideto get started) for those not familiar with the format or how to use the data. While there are existent data viewers likeOcean Data View (ODV)andJava Ocean Atlas (JOA)that can read in Argo profile data, several visualizations and web applications have been developed to help a wide range of users access and view Argo data.  Browse through the table below to learn more about the available options.  If you have a way to visualize Argo data that you would like added to the table below, email argo@ucsd.edu.
Compare visualization features here
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://argo.ucsd.edu/organization/

Argo
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Home
AboutHistoryArgo’s role in the observing systemMissionImplementation statusEnvironmental impactWhat makes a float part of Argo?Intl. Oceanographic Commission & ArgoArgo Awards
History
Argo’s role in the observing system
Mission
Implementation status
Environmental impact
What makes a float part of Argo?
Intl. Oceanographic Commission & Argo
Argo Awards
OrganizationArgo Steering TeamMembershipMeetingsArgo data systemOceanOPSArgo Regional CentresTechnical Community of Practice
Argo Steering Team
Membership
Meetings
Argo data system
OceanOPS
Argo Regional Centres
Technical Community of Practice
DataHow to use Argo data filesAcknowledging ArgoData from GDACsData on GTSData FAQData visualizationsData productsSoftware tools
How to use Argo data files
Acknowledging Argo
Data from GDACs
Data on GTS
Data FAQ
Data visualizations
Data products
Software tools
TechnologyFloat typesFloat deployment best practicesTelecommunications systemsTechnological innovations
Float types
Float deployment best practices
Telecommunications systems
Technological innovations
ScienceArgo and climate changeArgo observing the global oceanArgo and the modeling communityScience highlights
Argo and climate change
Argo observing the global ocean
Argo and the modeling community
Science highlights
OutreachMultimedia resourcesEducation materialsArgo storiesPublications
Multimedia resources
Education materials
Argo stories
Publications
OneArgoBioGeoChemical Argo MissionDeep Argo MissionPolar ArgoFramework for entering Argo
BioGeoChemical Argo Mission
Deep Argo Mission
Polar Argo
Framework for entering Argo
Search
Organization
Multi-National Argo
The array is made up of 30 different countries’ contributions that range from a single float, to the U.S. contribution, which is roughly 50% of the global array. To see how many floats are deployed by each country, look at theCommitments Table.  To learn more about the countries involved, see below.
Funding mechanisms differ widely between counties and involve over 50 research and operational agencies. Each national program has its own priorities but all nations subscribe to the goal of building the global array and to Argo’s open data policy.
There are four Argo missions:  core Argo, BGC Argo, Deep Argo and Polar Argo.  Core Argo is the temperature/salinity/pressure operational mission that was the original goal the Argo Program.BGC Argomeasures biogeochemical parameters and is building up to a global array.Deep Argomeasures the same parameters as core, but profiles are between 4000 and 6000 m and is just starting a global array after a pilot phase.  ThePolar ArgoMission focuses on floats deployed in both poles above 60 degrees and is an expansion of the original Argo Program.  Each national program contributes to the Argo missions differently and this will change as the pilot missions become operational.
Governance of Argo
The program, including the three missions, are overseen by anInternational Argo Steering Teamand aData Management Teamthat are comprised of representatives of float-providing countries.  See the figure at the right for a visual of the governance model.  There is now aframeworkin place for countries that would like to join the Argo Program.
The array’s growth is monitored by the Technical Coordinator atOceanOPSthat is located at IFREMER in Brest, France.  OceanOPS is responsible for monitoring and coordinating system for operational ocean observations. There is also an Argo Director.
A primary function of OceanOPS is to implement resolution XX-6 of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission  (IOC) of UNESCO. This resolution states that : “Concerned coastal states must be informed in advance, through appropriate channels, of all deployments of profiling floats which might drift into waters under their jurisdiction, indicating the exact location of such deployments.”
Thus OceanOPS operates a formal deployment notification process and some countries have given formal concurrence for the operation of Argo floats within their Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).  The framework now in place allows Argo to grow while complying with IOC rules.
Countries Involved in Argo
Several other countries including Cook Islands, Fiji, Iceland, Indonesia, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Mozambique, New Caledonia, Niue, Papua New Guinea, Russia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu have assisted greatly with float deployments using everything from small research vessels to huge container ships to aircraft. Broader participation in Argo by many nations and research groups is encouraged either through float procurement, logistical support for float deployment, or through analysis and assimilation of Argo data.
Tags:Organization
Contact
Additional LinksGlobal Argo Centers and ProgramsArgo Regional CentersNational Programs and Float SitesArgo Data Access and QC ToolsInternational Programs related to Argo
Global Argo Centers and Programs
Argo Regional Centers
National Programs and Float Sites
Argo Data Access and QC Tools
International Programs related to Argo

================================================================================

# https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/products/world-ocean-database

An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
The .gov means it’s official.Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.The that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Home
ProductsSearch/Filter
Search/Filter
ServicesAccessArchiveData CertificationMapsMonitoringOnline StoreRegionalState of the ServicesWorld Data System
Access
Archive
Data Certification
Maps
Monitoring
Online Store
Regional
State of the Services
World Data System
ResourcesAlertsChange NoticesEducationMetadataQuick Links
Alerts
Change Notices
Education
Metadata
Quick Links
NewsBAMSPublications
BAMS
Publications
Contact
AboutLocationsOur Impact
Locations
Our Impact
Enter Search Term(s):Search
Please note:Beginning 8/22, NCEI will be upgrading its systems, which will temporarily interrupt access to some services. The upgrade isexpected to take several weeks. We apologize for the inconvenience.
More details and affected products
Home
Products
World Ocean Database
World Ocean Database
The World Ocean Database (WOD) is world's largest collection of uniformly formatted, quality controlled, publicly available ocean profile data. It is a powerful tool for oceanographic, climatic, and environmental research, and the end result of more than 20 years of coordinated efforts to incorporate data from institutions, agencies, individual researchers, and data recovery initiatives into a single database. WOD data spans from Captain Cook's 1772 voyage to the contemporary Argo period, making it a valuable resource for long term and historical ocean climate analysis. Original versions of the 20,000+ datasets in the WOD are available through the NCEI archives.
Data Access
Documentation
Quality Control
Help
Access Methods
Use the WODselect retrieval system to search the WOD by specific parameters (date, geographic area, probe type, etc.) and measured variables. View a dataset distribution map and cast count of your search criteria, and download a custom dataset in WOD native, csv, or netCDF.
Launch WODSelect
WOD Updates
WOD data is also accessible through interfaces that sort data geographically and by date in native ASCII format.
Data by Location
Data by Year
For additional documentation and access methods, visit thedataset landing page.
Secchi Disk Dataset Format Description
Secchi Disk Dataset Format Description
Download Observations
Observation File Columns
Accession number (corresponds to original data in archive)
WOD cruise designator
WOD unique cast number
Latitude
Longitude
Year
Month
Day
Time (GMT, 24 hr format)
Secchi disk depth (meters)
Water color (extended Forel/Ule scale)
Major Releases
The WOD consists of periodic major releases and quarterly updates to those releases. Each major release is associated with a concurrent release of the World Ocean Atlas (WOA), and contains final quality control flags used in the WOA, which includes manual as well as automated steps.
Each quarterly update release includes additional historical and recent data and preliminary quality control. The latest major release is World Ocean Database 2023 (WOD23), which includes more than 18.6 million oceanographic casts made up of 3.13 billion individual profile measurements.
Current Version: WOD23
Mishonov A.V., T. P. Boyer, O. K. Baranova, C. N. Bouchard, S. Cross, H. E. Garcia, R.  A. Locarnini, C. R. Paver, J. R. Reagan, Z. Wang, D. Seidov, A. I. Grodsky, J. G. Beauchamp, (2024): World Ocean Database 2023. C. Bouchard, Technical Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 97, 206 pp.,doi.org/10.25923/z885-h264,
World Ocean Database 2023
WOD18
Boyer, T.P., O.K. Baranova, C. Coleman, H.E. Garcia, A. Grodsky, R.A. Locarnini, A.V. Mishonov, C.R. Paver, J.R. Reagan, D. Seidov, I.V. Smolyar, K. Weathers, M.M. Zweng,(2018): World Ocean Database 2018. A.V. Mishonov, Technical Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 87.
World Ocean Database 2018
WOD13
Boyer, T.P., J.I. Antonov, O.K. Baranova, C. Coleman, H.E. Garcia, A. Grodsky, D.R. Johnson, R.A. Locarnini, A.V. Mishonov, T.D. O'Brien, C.R. Paver, J.R. Reagan, D. Seidov, I.V. Smolyar, and M.M. Zweng, 2013: World Ocean Database 2013., S. Levitus, Ed., A. Mishonov, Technical Ed.; NOAA Atlas NESDIS 72, 209 pp.,doi:10.7289/V5NZ85MT.
WOD09
Boyer, T.P., J.I. Antonov , O.K. Baranova, H.E. Garcia, D.R. Johnson, R.A. Locarnini, A.V. Mishonov, T. D. O’Brien, D. Seidov, I.V. Smolyar, M.M. Zweng, 2009. World Ocean Database 2009 S. Levitus, Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 66, 216 pp.,
WOD05
Boyer, T.P., J.I. Antonov, H.E. Garcia, D.R. Johnson, R.A. Locarnini, A.V. Mishonov, M T. Pitcher, O.K. Baranova, I.V. Smolyar, 2006. World Ocean Database 2005. S. Levitus, Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 60, 190 pp.,
Current Citations
WOD Introduction
Mishonov A.V., T. P. Boyer, O. K. Baranova, C. N. Bouchard, S. Cross, H. E. Garcia, R.  A. Locarnini, C. R. Paver, J. R. Reagan, Z. Wang, D. Seidov, A. I. Grodsky, J. G. Beauchamp, (2024): World Ocean Database 2023. C. Bouchard, Technical Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 97, 206 pp.,doi.org/10.25923/z885-h264
WOD Introduction
WOD User Manual
Garcia, H.E., T. P. Boyer, R. A. Locarnini, J. R. Reagan, A. V. Mishonov, O. K. Baranova, C. R. Paver, Z. Wang, C. Bouchard, S. Cross, D. Seidov, D. Dukhovskoy (2024). World Ocean Database 2023: User’s Manual. A.V. Mishonov, Technical Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 98, pp 129.,doi.org/10.25923/j8gq-ee82
WOD User Manual
Data Sources
The oceanographic data that comprise the WOD have been acquired through many sources and projects as well as from individual scientists. In addition, many international organizations such as the IODE/GODAR and WDS have facilitated data exchanges, which have provided much data to the WOD. The World Ocean Database (WOD) is an NCEI product and anIODE(International Oceanographic Data and Information Exchange) project. This work is funded in partnership with the NOAA OARGlobal Ocean Monitoring (GOMO).
Ocean Profiles
The WOD is made up of ocean profiles, which contain measurements for a single variable (temperature, salinity, etc.) taken from one location at different depths, or a horizontal string of readings taken from the surface. WOD profiles must contain more than a single depth/variable pair. Multiple profiles taken at the same location with the same set of instruments form an oceanographic cast.
Variables
Temperature
Salinity
Oxygen
Nutrients
Tracers
Biological variables (plankton, chlorophyll, etc.)
Consult theWOD Introductionfor a full set of definitions, and theWOD User’s Manualfor a description of fields and codes.
Code Tables
Code tables necessary to use the World Ocean Database data.
Code Table Library
WOD Masks
Data masks delineating ocean areas, range basins, and 5-degree standard deviation.
range_area.msk
Ocean areas for each set of variable min/max ranges
range_basin_list.msk
Range basins list
sd_multiplier.msk
5-degree standard deviation multiplier
WOD Programs
Use these programs to read WOD data, or convert it from WOD format to tabular column or comma separated columns (.csv)wod_nc.fSample FORTRAN program for reading WOD ragged array netCDF filesreadFOR.txtReadme file describes the wodFOR programswodFOR.fSample FORTRAN program for reading the datasampFOR.txtSample of output from wodFOR.freadASC.txtDescribes the use of wodASC.fwodASC.fOutputs a user selected variable in either tabular or comma separated columnswodASC.exeExecutable for wodASC.f programsampASC.txtSample output data from wodASC.fwodSUR.fWrites surface-only data out in a comma-separated-value (CSV) formatwodSUR.exeMicrosoft compatible executable for wodSUR.fsampSUR.txtSample of output from wodSUR.exereadC.txtReadme file describing the wodC programwodC.cSample C program for reading the datawodC.exeExecutable for C programwodtodepthmatrix_info.txtInfo file describing the wodtodepthmatrix.c programwodtodepthmatrix.cSample C program for reading the dataWodtodepthmatrix.exeExecutable for wodtodepthmatrix.exe program (for Windows 64bit system)
Use these programs to read WOD data, or convert it from WOD format to tabular column or comma separated columns (.csv)
wod_nc.fSample FORTRAN program for reading WOD ragged array netCDF files
readFOR.txtReadme file describes the wodFOR programs
wodFOR.fSample FORTRAN program for reading the data
sampFOR.txtSample of output from wodFOR.f
readASC.txtDescribes the use of wodASC.f
wodASC.fOutputs a user selected variable in either tabular or comma separated columns
wodASC.exeExecutable for wodASC.f program
sampASC.txtSample output data from wodASC.f
wodSUR.fWrites surface-only data out in a comma-separated-value (CSV) format
wodSUR.exeMicrosoft compatible executable for wodSUR.f
sampSUR.txtSample of output from wodSUR.exe
readC.txtReadme file describing the wodC program
wodC.cSample C program for reading the data
wodC.exeExecutable for C program
wodtodepthmatrix_info.txtInfo file describing the wodtodepthmatrix.c program
wodtodepthmatrix.cSample C program for reading the data
Wodtodepthmatrix.exeExecutable for wodtodepthmatrix.exe program (for Windows 64bit system)
About Quality Control
Quality control procedures are documented and performed on each cast and the results are included as flags on each measurement. The WOD contains the data on the originally measured depth levels (observed) and also interpolated to standard depth levels to present a more uniform set of iso-surfaces for oceanographic and climate work.
The WOD is made up of more than 20,000 separate archived datasets from the United States and around the world, each of which is available in its original form in the NCEI archives. All datasets are converted to the same standard format, checked for duplication within the WOD, and assigned quality flags based on objective tests. Additional subjective flags are set upon calculation of ocean climatological mean fields which make up the World Ocean Atlas (WOA) series.
Corrections
Expendable Bathythermograph (XBT) Corrections
XBT References Table
Mechanical Bathythermograph (MBT) Corrections
Frequently Asked Questions
Please find guidance below on the following topics:
Access
Data Specifics
Global Ocean Heat and Salt Content
For additional help, please contactOCL.help@noaa.gov.
Access
Am I allowed to use and reproduce WOD/WOA data/figures in my publications?
The World Ocean Database and World Ocean Atlas are available for public use without restriction. Please let us know about WOD and WOA based publications by sending citations toncei.info@noaa.gov.
How do you extract header information from historical temperature profiles without processing the data?
With some programming skills, you can adapt WOD data reading programs to retrieve only header information from WOD native ASCII files, or create a subset in WODselect to isolate a geographic distribution graphic.
How do I access Sea Surface Temperature (SST) data?
TheGlobal Ocean Heat and Salt Contentproduct has historical sea surface temperature anomaly data from in situ measurements dating back to 1955. Download the temperature anomaly data, then add the temperature anomalies back to the climatological means (available on the same page) to calculate SSTs (as well as water temperature in the depth) for each year (or season) 1955 to present.
How do I download WOD data in NetCDF?
You can download data in netCDF, as well as CSV and WOD Native through WODselect.
How do I convert WOD ASCII data to a readable format?
Ocean Data View (ODV), a freeware oceanographic profile data display. Detailed instructions are available in theWOD Tutorialbeginning on page 7. Note that ODV cannot read surface only data, originator's quality flags, or plankton biomass and taxonomic data in the OSD file.
Use WODselect to download data as CSV or netCDF
How do I download WOD18 data for a specific region?
Use WODselect to search data by geographic coordinates
Can I download the entire WOD database?
To download WOD in native ASCII, use the following command:wget -N -nH -nd -r -e robots=off --no-parent --force-html 
For netCDF format, mark all years in WODselect (1773-2018), and request the data in netCDF. You will receive an email with files attached once your request is processed.
How long are my requested files available on the FTP site?
Files are removed from the FTP site 3 days after they are created.
Can I use the cruise ID number to find cruise attributes?
In WODselect:
Check the CRUISE option, select Build a Query.
Enter a cruise number in the search box (example format: US029567) and select Get an Inventory. To search multiple cruises, separate the number with a comma.
Select CRUISE LIST for a list of cruises with links to cruise and accession metadata.
Select a cruise to open a file with data distribution map at the top. Scroll down to access metadata.
Example:US029567. Click the accession# for the link to the Archive System.
WOD CRUISE REFERENCE US029567
COUNTRY UNITED STATES (US)
NCEI ACCESSION NUMBER (CTD) 59005
SHIP NAME ALPHA HELIX
INSTITUTE ALFRED-WEGENER-INSTITUTE (BREMERHAVEN)
PROJECT SHELF BASIN INTERACTION PROJECT (SBI)
DATE OF FIRST CAST 9/8/2001
DATE OF LAST CAST 9/12/2001
TOTAL NUMBER OF CASTS 54
Where can I look for references for XBT Bias Depth and Temperature Corrections?
TheXBT References Tablecontains the list of relevant references.
How do I make XBT corrections in a profile?
The XBT correction is in the second header code 54. See the list of the codes and the correction they represent.
Data Specifics
Why does WOD18 have fewer profiling float casts than WOD09?
A number of floats in the North Atlantic had a pressure offset problem which was not correctable. The Argo program removed these floats from their dataset, and we followed their example.
Read Argo's explanation
How can I calculate the apparent oxygen utilization (AOU) in the deep ocean?
Use the saturation oxygen content calculated using potential temperature with respect to the surface, minus the dissolved oxygen measured at depth.
How is the Surface Only Dataset (SUR) organized?
TheWOD Surface-Only Datasetis a set of single profile casts that contains all the surface-only data from an entire cruise. The individual levels of the surface-only form are distinct surface measurement sets from a given date/position. The cruise will span a time period from days to months rather than the single date/time of a profile cast. For this reason, surface-only data are in a single file rather than split out by year in the YEARLY directory, or by position in the GEOGRAPHIC directory.
Is there a time variable in WOD?
WOD time variables are listed in UTC format, and unspecified times are assumed to be UTC until otherwise proven.
As with all data, time zone information is not always correctly reported. We use quality control measure to correct common errors, including UTC designations that should be labeled as local time.
Does the WOD netCDF file contain information about the chlorophyll measuring method used?
Second Header variables in the netCDF file identify collection and processing methods used for the various parameters. For chlorophyll, we identify a whole suite of methods that range from in situ fluorometer to HPLC. The codes are listed below:
600 Fluorescence
601 Fluorescence in-situ Turner fluorometer (Strickland and Parsons 1972)
602 Fluorescence in-vivo underway (Lorenzen 1966)
603 Fluorometer in-situ CTD
604 Fluorometer (Aiken 1981)
605 Fluorometric chl-a assay acetone extraction
606 Fluorometric chl-a assay methanol extraction
607 Fluorometric chl-a assay acetone extraction; Turner fluorometer (Yentsch and Menzel, 1963, Holm-Hansen et al. 1965)
700 HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography)
701 HPLC (normal phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography)
702 HPLC (reverse phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography)
About chlorophyll CTD profiles
Many of the chlorophyll measurements in CTD datasets are uncalibrated fluorometer readings that are often still in engineering units. These data have to be read very carefully, and can only be evaluated on a cruise by cruise basis. There is a calibration indicator (variable specific second header 14), but this information is rarely included with the data.
More information is available on page 19 of the World Ocean Database 2018Introduction.
What do large negative values at the particular depths mean? Why do these data have !C code ‘0’, for good data?
-999.99 represents missing data in the WOD. We use zero as the flag for missing data in conjunction with the -999.99 value.
How are WOD depth values calculated?
Data are submitted with depth values
We use UNESCO algorithm for standard ocean to calculate depth for data that includes pressure measurements
Data collected from an expendable bathythermograph (XBT) has depths which are calculated from a drop-rate equation and time since drop
Pre 1976 depth calculations were derived from wire length and angle
Regardless of the depth calculation method, all profiles are interpolated to the standard World Ocean Atlas standard depths.
Explain the output format for WOD-reading programs
Output generally includes ocean parameters, number of significant digits stored, and QC flags. The parenthetical value states the number of significant digits in the measurement directly to its left. The same is true for second headers. The two bracketed numbers are single digit quality flags; one set by the WOD, and the other by the originator.
Note:The program only prints the first 3 decimal places, but the full value to the given significant figures is stored in the file’s array read.
Learn more about output format in theWOD User Manual, and consultWOD codesfor specific flag values.
Which methods are used to measure nutrient data?
There isn’t a definitive set of methods for measuring or calculating nutrient data. From page 45 of theWOD Introduction:
It is difficult to estimate the precision and reproducibility of the historical chemical data in part because (1) there has not been a generally accepted set of standard international analytical oceanographic methods; (2) there has been a continuous availability over time of new or improved analytical techniques for the sampling and determination of the concentration of dissolved and particulate constituents in seawater; (3) there is the practical difficulty of periodic comparison of the precision and accuracy of oceanographic data collected by oceanographic institutions worldwide.At present, we are not aware of a suitable monitoring program for the systematic comparison of analytical instruments, measurements, and certified reference standards used by international research Institutions or Universities to collect oceanographic observations.
We do include information on the method used for nutrient (and other) data when it is available. Variable description for the second header 6 may be found onWOD codespage, or accessed directly through themethods list.
Global Ocean Heat and Salt Content
What is the file format for Global Ocean Heat and Salt Content?
Officially archived versions of the fields are stored in Climate-Forecast (CF) compliant netCDF. See section 5, page 8 ofWorld Ocean Atlas 2018 documentationfor more details, other available formats.
Why is there an inconsistency between the 5-year and shorter average ocean heat anomalies?
The 5 year period is actually a composite calculated from the mean anomaly in each 1 degree grid square over a 5-year period using all measurements from that 5 year stretch. There’s a discrepancy between the 5 year composite and shorter periods, because the shorter means are based on conservative estimates due to limited data coverage. The 5-year composite mean typically has better data coverage, which allows for a less cautious, more precise estimate.
How is heat content calculated?
Temperature anomalies are calculated at 16 standard depths from 0-700m (or 26 standard depths 0-2000m) by subtracting observed (interpolated) temperatures from the long-term (1955-2018) climatological monthly mean. The mean of all temperature anomalies is calculated at each standard depth for every box on the grid. The temperature anomaly represents the volume of water that makes up the vertical distance from halfway between the next shallower depth and the given standard depth to halfway between the next deeper depth and the given standard depth.
The temperature anomaly is multiplied by the climatological mean density of the one-degree square and the heat capacity of water and the area and volume of the one-degree square for the given standard depth. The heat contents for each volume surrounding a standard depth are summed to calculate full ocean heat content anomaly for each one degree gridbox. The values for each gridbox are summed to calculate global value. [Note this is a global integral, not an average.] The area of each one-degree gridbox is calculated similar to the attached FORTRAN subroutine (easily adaptable to any software language).
Theland/sea maskused to decide whether a one-degree gridbox is land or ocean (the one-degree, not quarter-degree) is derived from the ETOPO2 altitude/bathymetry data set. This same land/sea mask is used to determine whether the volume of a given one-degree square extends to the bottom of the integration level (700 m or 2000 m) or to a shallower depth. Because ocean temperature measurements are relatively sparse at the subsurface level, we use an objective analysis technique to calculate a complete set of one-degree temperature anomaly data at each standard depth after the anomalies from existing data are calculated. From there the heat content is calculated. The objective analysis technique is described in a number of publications, includingWOA18 Temperature.
Does the dataset include yearly salt content data?
We have pentadal salinity anomalies back to 1955. SeeGlobal Heat and Salt Content, but yearly data only spans the Argo time period (i.e., 2005 onward) and is available on the salinity anomaly page.
What are the units for 0-700 m heat content?
The value of J/m**2 is multiplied by the grid area over which the heat content is calculated, resulting in final units of joules [J].
What is the halosteric component of sea level rise?
Halosteric change is the change in sea level due to the effects of salinity change on seawater density.
Related News
April 1, 2025
NCEI Collaborates with FathomVerse to Celebrate Citizen Science Month
March 31, 2021
New Climatologies Added to World Ocean Atlas
October 27, 2020
A Long-Term View of the Gulf
Follow Us
@NOAANCEI
@NOAAData
@NOAANCEI
News Feed
Contact Us
Email by topic
Phone: (828) 271-4800
Sitemap
Privacy Policy
Freedom of Information Act
Information Quality
Accessibility
Disclaimer
Department of Commerce
NOAA
NESDIS

================================================================================

# https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/products/world-ocean-database#main-content

An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
The .gov means it’s official.Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.The that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Home
ProductsSearch/Filter
Search/Filter
ServicesAccessArchiveData CertificationMapsMonitoringOnline StoreRegionalState of the ServicesWorld Data System
Access
Archive
Data Certification
Maps
Monitoring
Online Store
Regional
State of the Services
World Data System
ResourcesAlertsChange NoticesEducationMetadataQuick Links
Alerts
Change Notices
Education
Metadata
Quick Links
NewsBAMSPublications
BAMS
Publications
Contact
AboutLocationsOur Impact
Locations
Our Impact
Enter Search Term(s):Search
Please note:Beginning 8/22, NCEI will be upgrading its systems, which will temporarily interrupt access to some services. The upgrade isexpected to take several weeks. We apologize for the inconvenience.
More details and affected products
Home
Products
World Ocean Database
World Ocean Database
The World Ocean Database (WOD) is world's largest collection of uniformly formatted, quality controlled, publicly available ocean profile data. It is a powerful tool for oceanographic, climatic, and environmental research, and the end result of more than 20 years of coordinated efforts to incorporate data from institutions, agencies, individual researchers, and data recovery initiatives into a single database. WOD data spans from Captain Cook's 1772 voyage to the contemporary Argo period, making it a valuable resource for long term and historical ocean climate analysis. Original versions of the 20,000+ datasets in the WOD are available through the NCEI archives.
Data Access
Documentation
Quality Control
Help
Access Methods
Use the WODselect retrieval system to search the WOD by specific parameters (date, geographic area, probe type, etc.) and measured variables. View a dataset distribution map and cast count of your search criteria, and download a custom dataset in WOD native, csv, or netCDF.
Launch WODSelect
WOD Updates
WOD data is also accessible through interfaces that sort data geographically and by date in native ASCII format.
Data by Location
Data by Year
For additional documentation and access methods, visit thedataset landing page.
Secchi Disk Dataset Format Description
Secchi Disk Dataset Format Description
Download Observations
Observation File Columns
Accession number (corresponds to original data in archive)
WOD cruise designator
WOD unique cast number
Latitude
Longitude
Year
Month
Day
Time (GMT, 24 hr format)
Secchi disk depth (meters)
Water color (extended Forel/Ule scale)
Major Releases
The WOD consists of periodic major releases and quarterly updates to those releases. Each major release is associated with a concurrent release of the World Ocean Atlas (WOA), and contains final quality control flags used in the WOA, which includes manual as well as automated steps.
Each quarterly update release includes additional historical and recent data and preliminary quality control. The latest major release is World Ocean Database 2023 (WOD23), which includes more than 18.6 million oceanographic casts made up of 3.13 billion individual profile measurements.
Current Version: WOD23
Mishonov A.V., T. P. Boyer, O. K. Baranova, C. N. Bouchard, S. Cross, H. E. Garcia, R.  A. Locarnini, C. R. Paver, J. R. Reagan, Z. Wang, D. Seidov, A. I. Grodsky, J. G. Beauchamp, (2024): World Ocean Database 2023. C. Bouchard, Technical Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 97, 206 pp.,doi.org/10.25923/z885-h264,
World Ocean Database 2023
WOD18
Boyer, T.P., O.K. Baranova, C. Coleman, H.E. Garcia, A. Grodsky, R.A. Locarnini, A.V. Mishonov, C.R. Paver, J.R. Reagan, D. Seidov, I.V. Smolyar, K. Weathers, M.M. Zweng,(2018): World Ocean Database 2018. A.V. Mishonov, Technical Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 87.
World Ocean Database 2018
WOD13
Boyer, T.P., J.I. Antonov, O.K. Baranova, C. Coleman, H.E. Garcia, A. Grodsky, D.R. Johnson, R.A. Locarnini, A.V. Mishonov, T.D. O'Brien, C.R. Paver, J.R. Reagan, D. Seidov, I.V. Smolyar, and M.M. Zweng, 2013: World Ocean Database 2013., S. Levitus, Ed., A. Mishonov, Technical Ed.; NOAA Atlas NESDIS 72, 209 pp.,doi:10.7289/V5NZ85MT.
WOD09
Boyer, T.P., J.I. Antonov , O.K. Baranova, H.E. Garcia, D.R. Johnson, R.A. Locarnini, A.V. Mishonov, T. D. O’Brien, D. Seidov, I.V. Smolyar, M.M. Zweng, 2009. World Ocean Database 2009 S. Levitus, Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 66, 216 pp.,
WOD05
Boyer, T.P., J.I. Antonov, H.E. Garcia, D.R. Johnson, R.A. Locarnini, A.V. Mishonov, M T. Pitcher, O.K. Baranova, I.V. Smolyar, 2006. World Ocean Database 2005. S. Levitus, Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 60, 190 pp.,
Current Citations
WOD Introduction
Mishonov A.V., T. P. Boyer, O. K. Baranova, C. N. Bouchard, S. Cross, H. E. Garcia, R.  A. Locarnini, C. R. Paver, J. R. Reagan, Z. Wang, D. Seidov, A. I. Grodsky, J. G. Beauchamp, (2024): World Ocean Database 2023. C. Bouchard, Technical Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 97, 206 pp.,doi.org/10.25923/z885-h264
WOD Introduction
WOD User Manual
Garcia, H.E., T. P. Boyer, R. A. Locarnini, J. R. Reagan, A. V. Mishonov, O. K. Baranova, C. R. Paver, Z. Wang, C. Bouchard, S. Cross, D. Seidov, D. Dukhovskoy (2024). World Ocean Database 2023: User’s Manual. A.V. Mishonov, Technical Ed., NOAA Atlas NESDIS 98, pp 129.,doi.org/10.25923/j8gq-ee82
WOD User Manual
Data Sources
The oceanographic data that comprise the WOD have been acquired through many sources and projects as well as from individual scientists. In addition, many international organizations such as the IODE/GODAR and WDS have facilitated data exchanges, which have provided much data to the WOD. The World Ocean Database (WOD) is an NCEI product and anIODE(International Oceanographic Data and Information Exchange) project. This work is funded in partnership with the NOAA OARGlobal Ocean Monitoring (GOMO).
Ocean Profiles
The WOD is made up of ocean profiles, which contain measurements for a single variable (temperature, salinity, etc.) taken from one location at different depths, or a horizontal string of readings taken from the surface. WOD profiles must contain more than a single depth/variable pair. Multiple profiles taken at the same location with the same set of instruments form an oceanographic cast.
Variables
Temperature
Salinity
Oxygen
Nutrients
Tracers
Biological variables (plankton, chlorophyll, etc.)
Consult theWOD Introductionfor a full set of definitions, and theWOD User’s Manualfor a description of fields and codes.
Code Tables
Code tables necessary to use the World Ocean Database data.
Code Table Library
WOD Masks
Data masks delineating ocean areas, range basins, and 5-degree standard deviation.
range_area.msk
Ocean areas for each set of variable min/max ranges
range_basin_list.msk
Range basins list
sd_multiplier.msk
5-degree standard deviation multiplier
WOD Programs
Use these programs to read WOD data, or convert it from WOD format to tabular column or comma separated columns (.csv)wod_nc.fSample FORTRAN program for reading WOD ragged array netCDF filesreadFOR.txtReadme file describes the wodFOR programswodFOR.fSample FORTRAN program for reading the datasampFOR.txtSample of output from wodFOR.freadASC.txtDescribes the use of wodASC.fwodASC.fOutputs a user selected variable in either tabular or comma separated columnswodASC.exeExecutable for wodASC.f programsampASC.txtSample output data from wodASC.fwodSUR.fWrites surface-only data out in a comma-separated-value (CSV) formatwodSUR.exeMicrosoft compatible executable for wodSUR.fsampSUR.txtSample of output from wodSUR.exereadC.txtReadme file describing the wodC programwodC.cSample C program for reading the datawodC.exeExecutable for C programwodtodepthmatrix_info.txtInfo file describing the wodtodepthmatrix.c programwodtodepthmatrix.cSample C program for reading the dataWodtodepthmatrix.exeExecutable for wodtodepthmatrix.exe program (for Windows 64bit system)
Use these programs to read WOD data, or convert it from WOD format to tabular column or comma separated columns (.csv)
wod_nc.fSample FORTRAN program for reading WOD ragged array netCDF files
readFOR.txtReadme file describes the wodFOR programs
wodFOR.fSample FORTRAN program for reading the data
sampFOR.txtSample of output from wodFOR.f
readASC.txtDescribes the use of wodASC.f
wodASC.fOutputs a user selected variable in either tabular or comma separated columns
wodASC.exeExecutable for wodASC.f program
sampASC.txtSample output data from wodASC.f
wodSUR.fWrites surface-only data out in a comma-separated-value (CSV) format
wodSUR.exeMicrosoft compatible executable for wodSUR.f
sampSUR.txtSample of output from wodSUR.exe
readC.txtReadme file describing the wodC program
wodC.cSample C program for reading the data
wodC.exeExecutable for C program
wodtodepthmatrix_info.txtInfo file describing the wodtodepthmatrix.c program
wodtodepthmatrix.cSample C program for reading the data
Wodtodepthmatrix.exeExecutable for wodtodepthmatrix.exe program (for Windows 64bit system)
About Quality Control
Quality control procedures are documented and performed on each cast and the results are included as flags on each measurement. The WOD contains the data on the originally measured depth levels (observed) and also interpolated to standard depth levels to present a more uniform set of iso-surfaces for oceanographic and climate work.
The WOD is made up of more than 20,000 separate archived datasets from the United States and around the world, each of which is available in its original form in the NCEI archives. All datasets are converted to the same standard format, checked for duplication within the WOD, and assigned quality flags based on objective tests. Additional subjective flags are set upon calculation of ocean climatological mean fields which make up the World Ocean Atlas (WOA) series.
Corrections
Expendable Bathythermograph (XBT) Corrections
XBT References Table
Mechanical Bathythermograph (MBT) Corrections
Frequently Asked Questions
Please find guidance below on the following topics:
Access
Data Specifics
Global Ocean Heat and Salt Content
For additional help, please contactOCL.help@noaa.gov.
Access
Am I allowed to use and reproduce WOD/WOA data/figures in my publications?
The World Ocean Database and World Ocean Atlas are available for public use without restriction. Please let us know about WOD and WOA based publications by sending citations toncei.info@noaa.gov.
How do you extract header information from historical temperature profiles without processing the data?
With some programming skills, you can adapt WOD data reading programs to retrieve only header information from WOD native ASCII files, or create a subset in WODselect to isolate a geographic distribution graphic.
How do I access Sea Surface Temperature (SST) data?
TheGlobal Ocean Heat and Salt Contentproduct has historical sea surface temperature anomaly data from in situ measurements dating back to 1955. Download the temperature anomaly data, then add the temperature anomalies back to the climatological means (available on the same page) to calculate SSTs (as well as water temperature in the depth) for each year (or season) 1955 to present.
How do I download WOD data in NetCDF?
You can download data in netCDF, as well as CSV and WOD Native through WODselect.
How do I convert WOD ASCII data to a readable format?
Ocean Data View (ODV), a freeware oceanographic profile data display. Detailed instructions are available in theWOD Tutorialbeginning on page 7. Note that ODV cannot read surface only data, originator's quality flags, or plankton biomass and taxonomic data in the OSD file.
Use WODselect to download data as CSV or netCDF
How do I download WOD18 data for a specific region?
Use WODselect to search data by geographic coordinates
Can I download the entire WOD database?
To download WOD in native ASCII, use the following command:wget -N -nH -nd -r -e robots=off --no-parent --force-html 
For netCDF format, mark all years in WODselect (1773-2018), and request the data in netCDF. You will receive an email with files attached once your request is processed.
How long are my requested files available on the FTP site?
Files are removed from the FTP site 3 days after they are created.
Can I use the cruise ID number to find cruise attributes?
In WODselect:
Check the CRUISE option, select Build a Query.
Enter a cruise number in the search box (example format: US029567) and select Get an Inventory. To search multiple cruises, separate the number with a comma.
Select CRUISE LIST for a list of cruises with links to cruise and accession metadata.
Select a cruise to open a file with data distribution map at the top. Scroll down to access metadata.
Example:US029567. Click the accession# for the link to the Archive System.
WOD CRUISE REFERENCE US029567
COUNTRY UNITED STATES (US)
NCEI ACCESSION NUMBER (CTD) 59005
SHIP NAME ALPHA HELIX
INSTITUTE ALFRED-WEGENER-INSTITUTE (BREMERHAVEN)
PROJECT SHELF BASIN INTERACTION PROJECT (SBI)
DATE OF FIRST CAST 9/8/2001
DATE OF LAST CAST 9/12/2001
TOTAL NUMBER OF CASTS 54
Where can I look for references for XBT Bias Depth and Temperature Corrections?
TheXBT References Tablecontains the list of relevant references.
How do I make XBT corrections in a profile?
The XBT correction is in the second header code 54. See the list of the codes and the correction they represent.
Data Specifics
Why does WOD18 have fewer profiling float casts than WOD09?
A number of floats in the North Atlantic had a pressure offset problem which was not correctable. The Argo program removed these floats from their dataset, and we followed their example.
Read Argo's explanation
How can I calculate the apparent oxygen utilization (AOU) in the deep ocean?
Use the saturation oxygen content calculated using potential temperature with respect to the surface, minus the dissolved oxygen measured at depth.
How is the Surface Only Dataset (SUR) organized?
TheWOD Surface-Only Datasetis a set of single profile casts that contains all the surface-only data from an entire cruise. The individual levels of the surface-only form are distinct surface measurement sets from a given date/position. The cruise will span a time period from days to months rather than the single date/time of a profile cast. For this reason, surface-only data are in a single file rather than split out by year in the YEARLY directory, or by position in the GEOGRAPHIC directory.
Is there a time variable in WOD?
WOD time variables are listed in UTC format, and unspecified times are assumed to be UTC until otherwise proven.
As with all data, time zone information is not always correctly reported. We use quality control measure to correct common errors, including UTC designations that should be labeled as local time.
Does the WOD netCDF file contain information about the chlorophyll measuring method used?
Second Header variables in the netCDF file identify collection and processing methods used for the various parameters. For chlorophyll, we identify a whole suite of methods that range from in situ fluorometer to HPLC. The codes are listed below:
600 Fluorescence
601 Fluorescence in-situ Turner fluorometer (Strickland and Parsons 1972)
602 Fluorescence in-vivo underway (Lorenzen 1966)
603 Fluorometer in-situ CTD
604 Fluorometer (Aiken 1981)
605 Fluorometric chl-a assay acetone extraction
606 Fluorometric chl-a assay methanol extraction
607 Fluorometric chl-a assay acetone extraction; Turner fluorometer (Yentsch and Menzel, 1963, Holm-Hansen et al. 1965)
700 HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography)
701 HPLC (normal phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography)
702 HPLC (reverse phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography)
About chlorophyll CTD profiles
Many of the chlorophyll measurements in CTD datasets are uncalibrated fluorometer readings that are often still in engineering units. These data have to be read very carefully, and can only be evaluated on a cruise by cruise basis. There is a calibration indicator (variable specific second header 14), but this information is rarely included with the data.
More information is available on page 19 of the World Ocean Database 2018Introduction.
What do large negative values at the particular depths mean? Why do these data have !C code ‘0’, for good data?
-999.99 represents missing data in the WOD. We use zero as the flag for missing data in conjunction with the -999.99 value.
How are WOD depth values calculated?
Data are submitted with depth values
We use UNESCO algorithm for standard ocean to calculate depth for data that includes pressure measurements
Data collected from an expendable bathythermograph (XBT) has depths which are calculated from a drop-rate equation and time since drop
Pre 1976 depth calculations were derived from wire length and angle
Regardless of the depth calculation method, all profiles are interpolated to the standard World Ocean Atlas standard depths.
Explain the output format for WOD-reading programs
Output generally includes ocean parameters, number of significant digits stored, and QC flags. The parenthetical value states the number of significant digits in the measurement directly to its left. The same is true for second headers. The two bracketed numbers are single digit quality flags; one set by the WOD, and the other by the originator.
Note:The program only prints the first 3 decimal places, but the full value to the given significant figures is stored in the file’s array read.
Learn more about output format in theWOD User Manual, and consultWOD codesfor specific flag values.
Which methods are used to measure nutrient data?
There isn’t a definitive set of methods for measuring or calculating nutrient data. From page 45 of theWOD Introduction:
It is difficult to estimate the precision and reproducibility of the historical chemical data in part because (1) there has not been a generally accepted set of standard international analytical oceanographic methods; (2) there has been a continuous availability over time of new or improved analytical techniques for the sampling and determination of the concentration of dissolved and particulate constituents in seawater; (3) there is the practical difficulty of periodic comparison of the precision and accuracy of oceanographic data collected by oceanographic institutions worldwide.At present, we are not aware of a suitable monitoring program for the systematic comparison of analytical instruments, measurements, and certified reference standards used by international research Institutions or Universities to collect oceanographic observations.
We do include information on the method used for nutrient (and other) data when it is available. Variable description for the second header 6 may be found onWOD codespage, or accessed directly through themethods list.
Global Ocean Heat and Salt Content
What is the file format for Global Ocean Heat and Salt Content?
Officially archived versions of the fields are stored in Climate-Forecast (CF) compliant netCDF. See section 5, page 8 ofWorld Ocean Atlas 2018 documentationfor more details, other available formats.
Why is there an inconsistency between the 5-year and shorter average ocean heat anomalies?
The 5 year period is actually a composite calculated from the mean anomaly in each 1 degree grid square over a 5-year period using all measurements from that 5 year stretch. There’s a discrepancy between the 5 year composite and shorter periods, because the shorter means are based on conservative estimates due to limited data coverage. The 5-year composite mean typically has better data coverage, which allows for a less cautious, more precise estimate.
How is heat content calculated?
Temperature anomalies are calculated at 16 standard depths from 0-700m (or 26 standard depths 0-2000m) by subtracting observed (interpolated) temperatures from the long-term (1955-2018) climatological monthly mean. The mean of all temperature anomalies is calculated at each standard depth for every box on the grid. The temperature anomaly represents the volume of water that makes up the vertical distance from halfway between the next shallower depth and the given standard depth to halfway between the next deeper depth and the given standard depth.
The temperature anomaly is multiplied by the climatological mean density of the one-degree square and the heat capacity of water and the area and volume of the one-degree square for the given standard depth. The heat contents for each volume surrounding a standard depth are summed to calculate full ocean heat content anomaly for each one degree gridbox. The values for each gridbox are summed to calculate global value. [Note this is a global integral, not an average.] The area of each one-degree gridbox is calculated similar to the attached FORTRAN subroutine (easily adaptable to any software language).
Theland/sea maskused to decide whether a one-degree gridbox is land or ocean (the one-degree, not quarter-degree) is derived from the ETOPO2 altitude/bathymetry data set. This same land/sea mask is used to determine whether the volume of a given one-degree square extends to the bottom of the integration level (700 m or 2000 m) or to a shallower depth. Because ocean temperature measurements are relatively sparse at the subsurface level, we use an objective analysis technique to calculate a complete set of one-degree temperature anomaly data at each standard depth after the anomalies from existing data are calculated. From there the heat content is calculated. The objective analysis technique is described in a number of publications, includingWOA18 Temperature.
Does the dataset include yearly salt content data?
We have pentadal salinity anomalies back to 1955. SeeGlobal Heat and Salt Content, but yearly data only spans the Argo time period (i.e., 2005 onward) and is available on the salinity anomaly page.
What are the units for 0-700 m heat content?
The value of J/m**2 is multiplied by the grid area over which the heat content is calculated, resulting in final units of joules [J].
What is the halosteric component of sea level rise?
Halosteric change is the change in sea level due to the effects of salinity change on seawater density.
Related News
April 1, 2025
NCEI Collaborates with FathomVerse to Celebrate Citizen Science Month
March 31, 2021
New Climatologies Added to World Ocean Atlas
October 27, 2020
A Long-Term View of the Gulf
Follow Us
@NOAANCEI
@NOAAData
@NOAANCEI
News Feed
Contact Us
Email by topic
Phone: (828) 271-4800
Sitemap
Privacy Policy
Freedom of Information Act
Information Quality
Accessibility
Disclaimer
Department of Commerce
NOAA
NESDIS

================================================================================

# https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/

An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
The .gov means it’s official.Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.The that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Home
ProductsSearch/Filter
Search/Filter
ServicesAccessArchiveData CertificationMapsMonitoringOnline StoreRegionalState of the ServicesWorld Data System
Access
Archive
Data Certification
Maps
Monitoring
Online Store
Regional
State of the Services
World Data System
ResourcesAlertsChange NoticesEducationMetadataQuick Links
Alerts
Change Notices
Education
Metadata
Quick Links
NewsBAMSPublications
BAMS
Publications
Contact
AboutLocationsOur Impact
Locations
Our Impact
Enter Search Term(s):Search
Please note:Beginning 8/22, NCEI will be upgrading its systems, which will temporarily interrupt access to some services. The upgrade isexpected to take several weeks. We apologize for the inconvenience.
More details and affected products
National Centers for Environmental Information
Looking for Data?
Recent Weather
Search for recent weather data in your area. Weather forecasts are available through theNational Weather Service.
Featured News
June 29, 2023
When to Expect the Warmest Day of the Year
Our updated maps help identify which day of the year, on average, has the highest maximum temperature across the United States.
March 10, 2023
Meteorological Versus Astronomical Seasons
Meteorologists and climatologists define seasons differently from “regular” or astronomical spring, summer, fall, and winter.
June 9, 2025
Assessing the U.S. Climate in May 2025
The average temperature for the contiguous U.S. (CONUS) in May 2025 was 61.7°F, 1.5°F above the 20th-century average, ranking in the warmest third of the 131-year period of record.
March 10, 2025
On This Day: 2011 Tohoku Earthquake and Tsunami
On March 11, 2011, a magnitude 9.1 earthquake struck off the northeast coast of Honshu, Japan, generating a deadly tsunami.
Archive
NCEI maintains one of the most significant archives on Earth, with comprehensive oceanic, atmospheric, and geophysical data. We archive over 229 terabytes of data each month from over 130 observing platforms.
Access
NCEI provides access to an extensive archive of environmental data through several platforms. We deliver the climate, coastal, oceanographic, and geophysical data you need in a variety of formats.
Follow Us
@NOAANCEI
@NOAAData
@NOAANCEI
News Feed
Contact Us
Email by topic
Phone: (828) 271-4800
Sitemap
Privacy Policy
Freedom of Information Act
Information Quality
Accessibility
Disclaimer
Department of Commerce
NOAA
NESDIS

================================================================================

# https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/world-ocean-database-select/dbsearch.html

Home
Products
ServicesAccessArchiveCertificationMapsMonitoringOnline StoreRegionalWorld Data System
Access
Archive
Certification
Maps
Monitoring
Online Store
Regional
World Data System
ResourcesAlertsEducationMetadataNEWISQuick Links
Alerts
Education
Metadata
NEWIS
Quick Links
NewsBAMSPublications
BAMS
Publications
AboutLocationsOur Impact
Locations
Our Impact
Contact
Search
The World Ocean Database (WOD) is a NOAA NCEI data product and an activity of theIODE(International Oceanographic Data and Information Exchange) 
as well as the World Data Service for Oceanography of the World Data System hosted at NCEI.
The WODselectweb application enables users to retrieve and access the World Ocean Database data as well as quarterly updated/added new data 
by utilizing various search criteria specified by the user. 
The query results will provide a distribution map, cast count, and the option to select data formats such as
WOD native (ascii), Comma Separated Value (.csv), or netCDF (.nc) based on customized search criteria. The data will be extracted and placed on the NCEI data server, and the data links will be provided in the user's email.
More detailed information can be found in theIntroductionto the WOD andUser's Manual.
To build a user defined search query:
Place check mark in front of any number of criteria.
Press the "Build a query" button.
(If any criteria below are not checked, the default will apply).
Â Â
Follow us
@NOAANCEI
@NOAAData
@NOAANCEI
News Feed
Contact us
Email: ncei.info@noaa.gov
Phone: (828) 271-4800
Sitemap
Privacy Policy
Freedom of Information Act
Information Quality
Disclaimer
Take Our Survey
Department of Commerce
NOAA
NESDIS

================================================================================

# https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/world-ocean-database-select/dbsearch.html#main-content

Home
Products
ServicesAccessArchiveCertificationMapsMonitoringOnline StoreRegionalWorld Data System
Access
Archive
Certification
Maps
Monitoring
Online Store
Regional
World Data System
ResourcesAlertsEducationMetadataNEWISQuick Links
Alerts
Education
Metadata
NEWIS
Quick Links
NewsBAMSPublications
BAMS
Publications
AboutLocationsOur Impact
Locations
Our Impact
Contact
Search
The World Ocean Database (WOD) is a NOAA NCEI data product and an activity of theIODE(International Oceanographic Data and Information Exchange) 
as well as the World Data Service for Oceanography of the World Data System hosted at NCEI.
The WODselectweb application enables users to retrieve and access the World Ocean Database data as well as quarterly updated/added new data 
by utilizing various search criteria specified by the user. 
The query results will provide a distribution map, cast count, and the option to select data formats such as
WOD native (ascii), Comma Separated Value (.csv), or netCDF (.nc) based on customized search criteria. The data will be extracted and placed on the NCEI data server, and the data links will be provided in the user's email.
More detailed information can be found in theIntroductionto the WOD andUser's Manual.
To build a user defined search query:
Place check mark in front of any number of criteria.
Press the "Build a query" button.
(If any criteria below are not checked, the default will apply).
Â Â
Follow us
@NOAANCEI
@NOAAData
@NOAANCEI
News Feed
Contact us
Email: ncei.info@noaa.gov
Phone: (828) 271-4800
Sitemap
Privacy Policy
Freedom of Information Act
Information Quality
Disclaimer
Take Our Survey
Department of Commerce
NOAA
NESDIS

================================================================================

# https://soccom.princeton.edu/

Home
About UsOverviewKey OutcomesAcknowledgment TextPersonnelDeployment PartnersInstitutionsJobsRelated Programs
Overview
Key Outcomes
Acknowledgment Text
Personnel
Deployment Partners
Institutions
Jobs
Related Programs
ObservationsMap RoomStatus TablesData AccessFloat SpecificationsShipboard Data & ReportsManualsCode RepositoriesGlobal BGC-ArgoBiogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
Map Room
Status Tables
Data Access
Float Specifications
Shipboard Data & Reports
Manuals
Code Repositories
Global BGC-Argo
Biogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
ModelingModeling PlanWhat is an Earth System Model (ESM)?Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)Carbon System AlgorithmModel Assessment ProjectsClimate Model MetricsWind Sensitivity ExperimentsSouthern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Modeling Plan
What is an Earth System Model (ESM)?
Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)
Carbon System Algorithm
Model Assessment Projects
Climate Model Metrics
Wind Sensitivity Experiments
Southern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)
Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Broader ImpactsSOCCOM PublicationsExternal publications using SOCCOM dataAdopt-A-Float ProgramGraphicsMultimedia ResourcesEducation ResourcesPresentationsMedia ArticlesCapacity buildingFor the Media
SOCCOM Publications
External publications using SOCCOM data
Adopt-A-Float Program
Graphics
Multimedia Resources
Education Resources
Presentations
Media Articles
Capacity building
For the Media
Cruise Blogs
News & Events
Home
About UsOverviewKey OutcomesAcknowledgment TextPersonnelDeployment PartnersInstitutionsJobsRelated Programs
Overview
Key Outcomes
Acknowledgment Text
Personnel
Deployment Partners
Institutions
Jobs
Related Programs
ObservationsMap RoomStatus TablesData AccessFloat SpecificationsShipboard Data & ReportsManualsCode RepositoriesGlobal BGC-ArgoBiogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
Map Room
Status Tables
Data Access
Float Specifications
Shipboard Data & Reports
Manuals
Code Repositories
Global BGC-Argo
Biogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
ModelingModeling PlanWhat is an Earth System Model (ESM)?Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)Carbon System AlgorithmModel Assessment ProjectsClimate Model MetricsWind Sensitivity ExperimentsSouthern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Modeling Plan
What is an Earth System Model (ESM)?
Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)
Carbon System Algorithm
Model Assessment Projects
Climate Model Metrics
Wind Sensitivity Experiments
Southern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)
Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Broader ImpactsSOCCOM PublicationsExternal publications using SOCCOM dataAdopt-A-Float ProgramGraphicsMultimedia ResourcesEducation ResourcesPresentationsMedia ArticlesCapacity buildingFor the Media
SOCCOM Publications
External publications using SOCCOM data
Adopt-A-Float Program
Graphics
Multimedia Resources
Education Resources
Presentations
Media Articles
Capacity building
For the Media
Cruise Blogs
News & Events
Search ScopeThis SiteAll UCSD SitesFaculty/StaffSearch TermSearch
Download Our Biogeochemical Float Data
Biogeochemical SOSE Solution Available
Try Our Interactive Map to Access SOCCOM Data
Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling
The Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling project (SOCCOM) is a multi-institutional program focused on unlocking the mysteries of the Southern Ocean and determining its influence on climate. Founded and administered by Princeton for the first 10 years, the SOCCOM project is now under the leadership of PI Professor Lynne Talley at UCSD/SIO. SOCCOM is supported by theNational Science Foundationunder NSF Award PLR-1425989 and OPP-1936222 and 2332379.
Observing System
Data Access
Map Room
Data Assimilation & Products
Earth System Modeling
Adopt-A-Float Program
0
Publications
0
Active Floats
Latest News
UC San Diego - Scripps Institution of OceanographyClimate, Atmospheric Science and Physical Oceanography Division9500 Gilman Dr. La Jolla, CA 92093-0230Copyright ©2025Regents of the University of California.
    All rights reserved.
Feedback
Follow SOCCOM

================================================================================

# https://soccom.princeton.edu/#main-content

Home
About UsOverviewKey OutcomesAcknowledgment TextPersonnelDeployment PartnersInstitutionsJobsRelated Programs
Overview
Key Outcomes
Acknowledgment Text
Personnel
Deployment Partners
Institutions
Jobs
Related Programs
ObservationsMap RoomStatus TablesData AccessFloat SpecificationsShipboard Data & ReportsManualsCode RepositoriesGlobal BGC-ArgoBiogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
Map Room
Status Tables
Data Access
Float Specifications
Shipboard Data & Reports
Manuals
Code Repositories
Global BGC-Argo
Biogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
ModelingModeling PlanWhat is an Earth System Model (ESM)?Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)Carbon System AlgorithmModel Assessment ProjectsClimate Model MetricsWind Sensitivity ExperimentsSouthern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Modeling Plan
What is an Earth System Model (ESM)?
Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)
Carbon System Algorithm
Model Assessment Projects
Climate Model Metrics
Wind Sensitivity Experiments
Southern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)
Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Broader ImpactsSOCCOM PublicationsExternal publications using SOCCOM dataAdopt-A-Float ProgramGraphicsMultimedia ResourcesEducation ResourcesPresentationsMedia ArticlesCapacity buildingFor the Media
SOCCOM Publications
External publications using SOCCOM data
Adopt-A-Float Program
Graphics
Multimedia Resources
Education Resources
Presentations
Media Articles
Capacity building
For the Media
Cruise Blogs
News & Events
Home
About UsOverviewKey OutcomesAcknowledgment TextPersonnelDeployment PartnersInstitutionsJobsRelated Programs
Overview
Key Outcomes
Acknowledgment Text
Personnel
Deployment Partners
Institutions
Jobs
Related Programs
ObservationsMap RoomStatus TablesData AccessFloat SpecificationsShipboard Data & ReportsManualsCode RepositoriesGlobal BGC-ArgoBiogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
Map Room
Status Tables
Data Access
Float Specifications
Shipboard Data & Reports
Manuals
Code Repositories
Global BGC-Argo
Biogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
ModelingModeling PlanWhat is an Earth System Model (ESM)?Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)Carbon System AlgorithmModel Assessment ProjectsClimate Model MetricsWind Sensitivity ExperimentsSouthern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Modeling Plan
What is an Earth System Model (ESM)?
Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)
Carbon System Algorithm
Model Assessment Projects
Climate Model Metrics
Wind Sensitivity Experiments
Southern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)
Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Broader ImpactsSOCCOM PublicationsExternal publications using SOCCOM dataAdopt-A-Float ProgramGraphicsMultimedia ResourcesEducation ResourcesPresentationsMedia ArticlesCapacity buildingFor the Media
SOCCOM Publications
External publications using SOCCOM data
Adopt-A-Float Program
Graphics
Multimedia Resources
Education Resources
Presentations
Media Articles
Capacity building
For the Media
Cruise Blogs
News & Events
Search ScopeThis SiteAll UCSD SitesFaculty/StaffSearch TermSearch
Download Our Biogeochemical Float Data
Biogeochemical SOSE Solution Available
Try Our Interactive Map to Access SOCCOM Data
Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling
The Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling project (SOCCOM) is a multi-institutional program focused on unlocking the mysteries of the Southern Ocean and determining its influence on climate. Founded and administered by Princeton for the first 10 years, the SOCCOM project is now under the leadership of PI Professor Lynne Talley at UCSD/SIO. SOCCOM is supported by theNational Science Foundationunder NSF Award PLR-1425989 and OPP-1936222 and 2332379.
Observing System
Data Access
Map Room
Data Assimilation & Products
Earth System Modeling
Adopt-A-Float Program
0
Publications
0
Active Floats
Latest News
UC San Diego - Scripps Institution of OceanographyClimate, Atmospheric Science and Physical Oceanography Division9500 Gilman Dr. La Jolla, CA 92093-0230Copyright ©2025Regents of the University of California.
    All rights reserved.
Feedback
Follow SOCCOM

================================================================================

# https://soccom.princeton.edu/observations/data-access

Home
About UsOverviewKey OutcomesAcknowledgment TextPersonnelDeployment PartnersInstitutionsJobsRelated Programs
Overview
Key Outcomes
Acknowledgment Text
Personnel
Deployment Partners
Institutions
Jobs
Related Programs
ObservationsMap RoomStatus TablesData AccessFloat SpecificationsShipboard Data & ReportsManualsCode RepositoriesGlobal BGC-ArgoBiogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
Map Room
Status Tables
Data Access
Float Specifications
Shipboard Data & Reports
Manuals
Code Repositories
Global BGC-Argo
Biogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
ModelingModeling PlanWhat is an Earth System Model (ESM)?Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)Carbon System AlgorithmModel Assessment ProjectsClimate Model MetricsWind Sensitivity ExperimentsSouthern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Modeling Plan
What is an Earth System Model (ESM)?
Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)
Carbon System Algorithm
Model Assessment Projects
Climate Model Metrics
Wind Sensitivity Experiments
Southern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)
Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Broader ImpactsSOCCOM PublicationsExternal publications using SOCCOM dataAdopt-A-Float ProgramGraphicsMultimedia ResourcesEducation ResourcesPresentationsMedia ArticlesCapacity buildingFor the Media
SOCCOM Publications
External publications using SOCCOM data
Adopt-A-Float Program
Graphics
Multimedia Resources
Education Resources
Presentations
Media Articles
Capacity building
For the Media
Cruise Blogs
News & Events
Home
About UsOverviewKey OutcomesAcknowledgment TextPersonnelDeployment PartnersInstitutionsJobsRelated Programs
Overview
Key Outcomes
Acknowledgment Text
Personnel
Deployment Partners
Institutions
Jobs
Related Programs
ObservationsMap RoomStatus TablesData AccessFloat SpecificationsShipboard Data & ReportsManualsCode RepositoriesGlobal BGC-ArgoBiogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
Map Room
Status Tables
Data Access
Float Specifications
Shipboard Data & Reports
Manuals
Code Repositories
Global BGC-Argo
Biogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
ModelingModeling PlanWhat is an Earth System Model (ESM)?Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)Carbon System AlgorithmModel Assessment ProjectsClimate Model MetricsWind Sensitivity ExperimentsSouthern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Modeling Plan
What is an Earth System Model (ESM)?
Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs)
Carbon System Algorithm
Model Assessment Projects
Climate Model Metrics
Wind Sensitivity Experiments
Southern Ocean Model Intercomparison Project (SOMIP)
Ocean & Climate Model Discovery Environment
Broader ImpactsSOCCOM PublicationsExternal publications using SOCCOM dataAdopt-A-Float ProgramGraphicsMultimedia ResourcesEducation ResourcesPresentationsMedia ArticlesCapacity buildingFor the Media
SOCCOM Publications
External publications using SOCCOM data
Adopt-A-Float Program
Graphics
Multimedia Resources
Education Resources
Presentations
Media Articles
Capacity building
For the Media
Cruise Blogs
News & Events
Search ScopeThis SiteAll UCSD SitesFaculty/StaffSearch TermSearch
HOME
Observations
Data Access
Observations
Map Room
Status Tables
Data Access
Float Specifications
Shipboard Data & Reports
Manuals
Code Repositories
Global BGC-Argo
Biogeochemical Southern Ocean State Estimate
Data Access
Acknowledge the SOCCOM Project
Users of SOCCOM float or shipboard data should acknowledge the SOCCOM project – click the link above for details.
Float Access & Visualization
Accessing Float Data FilesDetailed information on our various data formats and resources
Interactive MapView float and profile locations, download raw and QC’d data files (ODV format)
SOCCOMVizPlot float data
Euro-Argo portalClick on 4th column “WMO Euro-Argo Link” to access SOCCOM float information (measured parameters only)
PolarWatch ERDDAPExplore, subset, and create images of SOCCOM quality-controlled data from either the near-real time dataset or latest snapshot archive through NOAA’s PolarWatch Environmental Research Division Data Access Program (ERDDAP)
Biogeochemical-Argo MapLocate, identify (WMO) and get access to the NetCDF (*.nc) of the merged profiles of a specific SOCCOM float (figures for each float are from real-time, not QC’d, data and should not be used for scientific purposes)
ArgovisAccess Argo profiles via API, or visualize temperature, salinity, and BGC data by location. View float trajectory forecasts, compare gridded fields, co-locate Argo data with weather events.
Float Data Files
Entire float dataset with DOIIncludes measured parameters plus derived carbon and biological parameters, most up-to-date QC (ODVtext, netCDF and Matlab formats)
Single float data filesFiles for each float in ODV (SOCCOM QC with derived parameters) or netCDF (Argo DAC data) formats
Float Trajectory FilesTrajectories for all floats, ASCII format (zipped)
Other BGC float data
UW global O2data set –  global float O2 data are now available in theArgo data system
Non-SOCCOM BGC Float table
Shipboard Data
Float/Cruise Matchup Table
Cruise Data
UC San Diego - Scripps Institution of OceanographyClimate, Atmospheric Science and Physical Oceanography Division9500 Gilman Dr. La Jolla, CA 92093-0230Copyright ©2025Regents of the University of California.
    All rights reserved.
Feedback
Follow SOCCOM

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
Home
Leading, coordinating and supporting vital ocean observing
Integrating the system, empowering the community, forming the partnerships.
Modelling, mitigating and adapting to climate change
Essential and sustained observations, including in deep ocean and remote regions.
Underpinning accurate weather forecasts and warnings
Empowering coastal communities, societies and the blue economy, enabling forward planning.
Monitoring marine ecosystem health and preserving life
Observing biodiversity, habitat and human impact for conservation and sustainable use.
We enable each part of the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) to contribute to its highest capacity, helping to build an integrated and responsive system.
Why we observe the ocean?
Observing the ocean delivers the essential information needed for our sustainable development, safety, wellbeing, and prosperity.
Read more
What we do
We coordinate observing the ocean, covering climate and ocean health and providing more accurate weather forecasts and early warnings.
Read more
Who we are
We are an Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) led programme. The IOC is part of UNESCO.
Read more
Latest News
News ArticleCall for Co-Chair of the Observing Together ProgrammeSeptember 10, 2025
News ArticleCall for Individual Consultants: GOOS Communication ConsultantSeptember 5, 2025
News ArticleCall for Individual Consultants: Ocean Best Practices System Support OfficerAugust 11, 2025
Upcoming Events
ColombiaLiving Data 202521 – 24 October 2025
Mombasa, KenyaStrengthening Sea Level Monitoring and Data Management in East Africa for Coastal Resilience and Community Safety  (SEAMARCS) – Inception Workshop24 – 26 September 2025
Oslo, NorwayICES-IOC Workshop on automated plankton analysis using imaging in flow methods24 – 26 September 2025
Our work
We lead the ocean observing community and create the partnerships needed to grow an integrated, responsive and sustained observing system. This means encouraging collaboration, supporting teams of experts and developing capacity.
Observations and data
A trusted and highly valuable collaborative system of sustained observations from our network of independently-managed and funded observing elements.
Read more
Knowledge and resources
A comprehensive collection of resources and documents that include best practices, reports and presentations, contributed by ocean observing experts.
Read more
Projects
Advancing innovation and expanding the observing system, services and product delivery by expanding into new areas and capabilities.
Read more
How you can join us in our vital work
The global ocean observing system needs to evolve to better meet the needs of end users. Join us and play your part in shaping and achieving our vision of a more powerful and effective global ocean observing system now.
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/why-observe-the-ocean/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
Why observe the ocean?
The ocean covers 71% of our planet’s surface. We are increasingly recognising how much we rely on it to support human life and our economic, cultural, social and environmental wellbeing.
Ocean observing is essential for a better understanding of how society and all life on earth is affected by climate change. The information gathered is invaluable to policymakers and individual nations, guiding them to make change at a global, regional and local level.
Information from ocean observing is also essential for weather forecasting. It delivers early warning of hazards like tsunamis, storm surges and extreme waves that helps save lives and enables marine operators to remain efficient.Looking to the future, a sustainable ocean economy has the potential to be a major source of food, jobs, and energy.
But this complex and dynamic socio-ecological system is also influenced by activities on land, ocean, atmosphere and interactions between the ocean and cryosphere.
Continued ocean warming, exacerbated by ocean acidification and other factors, is projected to lead to corals and other ecosystems essential for biodiversity and food and livelihood for millions of people disappearing.
Dead zones and low oxygen zones are being created by deoxygenation caused by the effects of increased nutrient loads and ocean warming.
Nutrient pollution is leading to harmful algal blooms (HABs) that devastate marine biodiversity and pose a significant risk to human health.
We’re also aware of how much we don’t know. Especially when it comes to understanding marine biodiversity and the seabed in areas beyond national jurisdiction as well as our knowledge of polar regions and the Southern Ocean.
GOOS observes the ocean to increase our knowledge, help keep humanity and our planet safe, while playing our part in enabling environmental regeneration and economic growth for the future.
Our vision for 2030
By 2030, we will have a truly global ocean observing system that delivers the essential information needed for our sustainable development, safety, wellbeing and prosperity.
It will be responsive to the needs of end users, able to mitigate mounting pressures on the ocean and enable resilient and sustainable blue economies.
GOOS will be the vehicle for designing, building and widening the use of the necessary observations and information systems with capability enhanced by new lower-cost technologies.
It will provide the critical ocean information required for policymakers and the public and private sectors to adapt to and mitigate climate change.
Our focus areas
Our three focus areas reflect major societal needs. They correspond to our mandate to contribute to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the UN Convention on Biodiversity and Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) and World Meteorological Organization (WMO) mandates to provide operational services.
Climate
Climate change is ocean change. Accurate modelling, mitigation and adaptation require long-term, in-depth observations.
Read more
Forecasts and warnings
Effective data flow enables businesses and individuals to make more informed and better decisions.
Read more
Ocean health
Scientific evidence shows that marine ecosystem health is impacted by and can impact human activities.
Read more
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/events

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
Events
Upcoming Events24 Sep – 3 Dec 2025
ICES-IOC Workshop on automated plankton analysis using imaging in flow methods
Strengthening Sea Level Monitoring and Data Management in East Africa for Coastal Resilience and Community Safety  (SEAMARCS) - Inception Workshop
Living Data 2025
GOOD-OARS Summer School
Twentieth Session of the Intergovernmental Coordination Group for the Tsunami Early Warning and Mitigation System in the North-eastern Atlantic, the Mediterranean and Connected Seas.  3–5 December 2025, UNESCO Headquarters, Paris, France
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/why-observe-the-ocean/climate/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
Climate
The Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) helps scientists assess climate and its impact and make projections by measuring Essential Ocean Variables (EOVs) such as heat content and sea level.
Every year, roughly a quarter of all excess human carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions are absorbed by the ocean. According to The 2013 IPCC Assessment Report 5, oceans also absorb 93% of excess heat.
As the human population has grown and atmospheric CO2 concentration has risen exponentially, our climate and its extremes have changed. More human CO2 emissions are absorbed by the ocean, making it hotter and more acidic.
“As we learn more about the ocean, we increase our ability to tackle climate change.”
Ocean heating also reduces the solubility of oxygen, critical for most ocean life. It is predicted that the size of areas with poor water quality as a result of reduced oxygen levels will grow.
The recent rise in ocean heat has resulted in the global sea level rising steadily. Melting land-locked ice in areas such as Antarctica and Greenland has increased the amount of water in ocean basins. The water itself has also expanded because increased levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere trap heat.
But, as we learn more about the ocean, we increase our ability to tackle climate change.
GOOS’s sustained and extended observations, including those in the deep ocean and remote regions, help model climate change and variability and the impact it will have on ocean life. They also track the success of mitigation programmes.
Where next?
Read our vision for 2030
By 2030, we will have a global ocean observing system truly responsive to the needs of end users.
Read more
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/what-we-do/2030-strategy/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
2030 Strategy
By 2030, we will have a global ocean observing system truly responsive to the needs of end users, able to mitigate mounting pressures on the ocean and enable resilient and sustainable blue economies.
GOOS will be the vehicle for designing, building and widening the use of the necessary observations and information systems with capability enhanced by new innovative technologies.
It will provide the critical ocean information required for policymakers and the public and private sectors to adapt to and mitigate climate change. Also, it will generate a suite of improved environmental forecasts, protect ocean health and support sustainable growth as well as marine-based activities.
The result will be a fully integrated global observing system that captures essential physical, chemical, biological and ecological ocean properties.
More relevant information
More information relevant to climate, forecasts, early warnings, ocean health and human impacts will flow from locally and remotely sourced ocean observations.
Seasonal forecasts will become more accurate, thanks to increased knowledge of the major atmospheric and ocean processes and their interactions. This will enable improved planning in farming, construction, insurance, public health and water, ecosystem and wildlife management.
Networks of autonomous platforms are already developing. These are composed of elements like gliders, floats, profilers and moorings able to send real or near real time measurements to open databases, complementing satellite observations of the ocean surface.
Soon data to develop a wider range of assessments, forecasts, data products and services will be freely available.
Wider accessibility
The public will have access to the same information as policy makers and may even be part of the process. Parts of the sampling system will automatically adjust to changing needs.
As ocean observations become more valuable to national economies, nations will increasingly share data on Essential Ocean Variables (EOVs) collected in national waters and beyond more widely.
The challenge and the opportunity
Implementing our 2030 strategy will demand a step change in the level and effectiveness of partnerships across the scientific and end user communities. It will require a deep commitment to building a more human, more multi-disciplinary observing system capability.
Alongside public funding, we will need backing and expertise from the private sector.
Rapidly growing awareness of the threats posed by climate change also presents an opportunity to mobilize the world to implement solutions together.
Today, the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development 2021-2030 is contributing to a sense of urgency around needing to define a new and sustainable life for the ocean and the life it supports.
We fully support the Ocean Decade as a means of raising the profile of ocean observing and helping us generate the necessary funding to achieve our vision.
Find out more about the Global Ocean Observing System 2030 Strategyhere.
Where next?
Generation Ocean: a Decade of Ocean Observing
Read how we’re contributing to the exciting Decade of Ocean science initiative.
Click here
Featured documents:2030 Strategy Report
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/what-we-do/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
What we do
Since 1991, we have been leading the development of a truly global ocean observing system that delivers the essential information needed for our sustainable development, safety, wellbeing and prosperity.
GOOS is led by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO, and co-sponsored by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the International Science Council (ISC).
We lead and support a community of international, regional and national ocean observing programmes, governments, UN agencies, research organizations and individual scientists.
Ocean observing is fundamental to achieving the goals of the Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development. We are proud to be a key part of this visionary initiative.
Developing tools and technology
We help develop the observing tools and technology, information systems, scientific analysis and forecasts that enable the global community to leverage the value of its investment.
Initially, we focused on building a system to support climate science and be the observational backbone for operational forecast systems.
In 2011, we began implementing the Framework for Ocean Observing.This is a guide for multiple stakeholders that reflects concerns about ocean health and the demand from nations for information to manage their global economies.
We lead and support the implementation of the Framework to benefit users. Coastal areas and regional seas are a growing focus area.
Mission and principles
Leading the ocean observing community and creating partnerships to grow an integrated, responsive and sustained observing system.
Read more
2030 Strategy
By 2030, we will have a global ocean observing system truly responsive to the needs of end users.
Read more
Framework
Guides our implementation of an integrated and sustained ocean observing system to deliver maximum impact.
Read more
Partnerships
Partners help us implement parts of the observing system, engage users and evaluate its effectiveness.
Read more
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/what-we-do/mission-and-principles/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
Mission and principles
Our mission is to lead the ocean observing community and create the partnershipsto grow an integrated, responsive and sustained observing system that serves users as effectively as possible.
By integrated, we mean a truly global ocean observing system that delivers the essential information needed for our sustainable development, safety, wellbeing and prosperity.
The ocean observing community is made up of local, national and regional ocean observing systems and programmes, principal investigators, scientists and technicians making long-term observations within national programmes and global ocean observing networks, and many individuals.
Our core principles are to:
Implement through user-driven design.
Maintain sustained observations.
Ensure regular evaluation.
Set global standards and best practices.
Looking forward to the next decade, we will achieve our mission by offering more inclusive governance and increased expertise, engagement, communication and capacity.
We will also engage with existing and new partners and stakeholders to deliver our 2030 strategy while building advocacy and visibility with stakeholders.
Where next?
Read our vision for 2030
By 2030, we will have a global ocean observing system truly responsive to the needs of end users.
Click here
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/who-we-are/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
Who we are
GOOS is an Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC)-led programme. The IOC is part of UNESCO.
GOOS Management Team
The GOOS Management Team includes members at the GOOS Office in Paris and across the globe, facilitating collaboration between various GOOS Components and contributing to GOOS management and coordination.
Read more
Steering Committee
The Steering Committee governs and coordinates the components of GOOS, steering its work to achieve objectives of the Global Ocean Observing System 2030 Strategy.
Read more
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)
The OCG strengthens GOOS implementation by coordinating the system through 13 global observing networks and OceanOPS.
Read more
Expert Panels
The Physics and Climate, Biogeochemistry and Biology and Ecosystems Panels are central to our work and liaise with and advocate for users.
Read more
Expert Team on Operational Ocean Forecasting Systems (ETOOFS)
ETOOFS guides initiatives to improve capacity, quality and interoperability of ocean model forecast products.
Read more
GOOS Regional Alliances (GRAs)
GRAs identify, enable and develop GOOS ocean monitoring and services to meet regional and national priorities.
Read more
GOOS National Focal Points (NFPs)
NFPs are the appropriate contact points in each Member State for affairs regarding the implementation of the Global Ocean Observing System at national and global levels.
Read more
Where next?
GOOS was created in March 1991
It was an initiative of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) designed to meet the needs of many nations.
Click here
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/who-we-are/goos-steering-committee/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
GOOS Steering Committee
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# https://www.goosocean.org/who-we-are/observations-coordination-group/

Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Home
Why observe the ocean?ClimateForecasts and warningsOcean health
Climate
Forecasts and warnings
Ocean health
What we doMission and principles2030 StrategyDecade of ocean scienceFrameworkEOVsOcean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairsPartnerships
Mission and principles
2030 StrategyDecade of ocean science
Decade of ocean science
FrameworkEOVs
EOVs
Ocean DecadeOcean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the ProgrammeCoastPredictObserving TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Ocean Observing Co-DesignApproachWorkshopBehind the Programme
Approach
Workshop
Behind the Programme
CoastPredict
Observing TogetherProgramme co-chairs
Programme co-chairs
Partnerships
Who we areGOOS Management TeamGOOS Steering CommitteeObservations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData ManagementExpert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and EcosystemsETOOFSRegional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task TeamNational Focal PointsHistory
GOOS Management Team
GOOS Steering Committee
Observations Coordination Group (OCG)OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami BuoysCapacity DevelopmentOceanOPSOCG TeamStandards and Best PracticesData Management
OCG NetworksARGODBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction GroupsSOTASAPVOSSOOPGLOSSAniBOSGO-SHIPOceanSITESHF RadarOcean GlidersTsunami Buoys
ARGO
DBCPEBTT-CBTT-MBTT-DMTT-DBPDTT-WMTT-ESPP-HRSSTWorking Group on data buoy VandalismNFPAction Groups
EB
TT-CB
TT-MB
TT-DM
TT-DBPD
TT-WM
TT-ES
PP-HRSST
Working Group on data buoy Vandalism
NFP
Action Groups
SOT
ASAP
VOS
SOOP
GLOSS
AniBOS
GO-SHIP
OceanSITES
HF Radar
Ocean Gliders
Tsunami Buoys
Capacity Development
OceanOPS
OCG Team
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
Expert panelsPhysics and ClimateBiogeochemistryBiology and Ecosystems
Physics and Climate
Biogeochemistry
Biology and Ecosystems
ETOOFS
Regional AlliancesGRA Governance TypesGRA ForumGRA: Black Sea GOOSGRA: CIOOSGRA: EuroGOOSGRA: GOOS AfricaGRA: GRASPGRA: IOCARIBE-GOOSGRA: IMOSGRA: IOGOOSGRA: MonGOOSGRA: NEAR-GOOSGRA: OCEATLANGRA: PI-GOOSGRA: SEAGOOSGRA: U.S. IOOSArORA Task Team
GRA Governance Types
GRA Forum
GRA: Black Sea GOOS
GRA: CIOOS
GRA: EuroGOOS
GRA: GOOS Africa
GRA: GRASP
GRA: IOCARIBE-GOOS
GRA: IMOS
GRA: IOGOOS
GRA: MonGOOS
GRA: NEAR-GOOS
GRA: OCEATLAN
GRA: PI-GOOS
GRA: SEAGOOS
GRA: U.S. IOOS
ArORA Task Team
National Focal Points
History
Our workUse casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictionsOcean Best PracticesEndorsement ProcessProjectsPublicationsReportsDialogues with IndustryGovernance documentsCommunity resources
Use casesUse case: Offshore wind energy developmentUse case: Reducing whale strikesUse case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Use case: Offshore wind energy development
Use case: Reducing whale strikes
Use case: Multi-year hurricane predictions
Ocean Best PracticesEndorsement Process
Endorsement Process
Projects
Publications
Reports
Dialogues with Industry
Governance documents
Community resources
News
Events
Webinars
Subscribe
Contact us
Observations Coordination Group
The Observations Coordination Group (OCG) works toguideandstrengthenthe implementation of the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) and WMO Integrated Global Observing System (WIGOS) through identifying, coordinating and developing relevant initiatives across the global ocean observing networks.
The vision is to support the delivery of a fit-for-purpose, integrated, and coherent Global Ocean Observing System of networks.
The OCG develops actions under 8 foci:
Defining and responding to observing system needs
Observing Advances
Standards and Best Practices
Data Management
OceanOPS
Metrics
Environmental Stewardship
Capacity Development
“I am very excited by the remarkable progress we have made in implementing a more unified, efficient, and transparent ocean observing system.”
OCG Networks
Explore the work of 13 individual global ocean observing networks that contribute to the OCG.
Read more
OceanOPS
The OceanOPS offers vital network visualisation, monitoring and support to users of the system.
Read more
OCG Members
The OCG team consists of the leadership of all the GOOS networks and the OCG Executive Committee
Read more
Goals and Achievements
Coming soon
Latest news
Call for Applications: Observations Coordination Group Vice Chair WMO/WIGOSAugust 8, 2025Deadline: 26 September 2025 The Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) is seeking applications for Vice Chair WMO/WIGOS for its Observations Coordination Group (OCG).  GOOS is the major ocean observing programmatic element of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) Medium-term Strategy 2022–2029…Read more: Call for Applications: Observations Coordination Group Vice Chair WMO/WIGOS
Uncrewed Surface Vehicles Go Global: SUN Fleet Joins GOOS as a New Emerging NetworkJuly 4, 2025A new emerging ocean observing network joins the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS), marking a key step in expanding coordinated, global ocean surface observations. This fleet of Uncrewed Surface Vehicles, called SUN Fleet, is able to monitor numerous GOOS Essential…Read more: Uncrewed Surface Vehicles Go Global: SUN Fleet Joins GOOS as a New Emerging Network
Key documents:
Terms of Reference
Goals (coming soon)
GOOS Report Card
OCG Network Criteria
Cross Network Data Strategy
OCG Overview
Sponsored by
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on latest news and opportunities

================================================================================

# Temperature and Humidity in Oceanographic Context

# Temperature and Humidity in Oceanographic Context

    ## Sea Surface Temperature (SST)
    Sea surface temperature (SST) is a critical variable measured by Argo floats and other oceanographic platforms. SST represents the temperature of the ocean's surface layer, typically the top few meters, and is a key indicator of climate variability. According to Argo data, global SST has risen by approximately 0.13°C per decade since 1971 due to increased ocean heat content. Argo floats measure temperature profiles from the surface to 2,000 meters, providing data on thermal gradients like the thermocline. The World Ocean Database (WOD) aggregates SST data from Argo, research vessels, and buoys, showing regional variations, such as warmer SSTs in the tropical Pacific (up to 30°C) and cooler temperatures in the Southern Ocean (0–5°C). SST influences atmospheric humidity by driving evaporation, which fuels the global water cycle.

    ## Ocean Heat Content (OHC)
    Ocean heat content (OHC) quantifies the energy stored in the ocean, a primary metric for global warming. Argo floats have been instrumental since 2000, measuring temperature anomalies down to 2,000 meters. From 1971–2018, OHC increased at a rate of 0.43 W/m², with one-third of the heat penetrating below 700 meters by 2020. This warming drives thermal expansion, contributing to sea level rise (3.7 mm/year globally). The Southern Ocean absorbs over 50% of global OHC, as observed by SOCCOM floats with enhanced sensors. OHC data from Argo and satellites like TOPEX/Poseidon show accelerated warming at 0.15 W/m² per decade, impacting marine ecosystems and climate models.

    ## Atmospheric Humidity and Ocean Interactions
    Atmospheric humidity, particularly relative humidity over oceans, is closely tied to SST and evaporation rates. The Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) notes that warmer SSTs increase evaporation, raising atmospheric water vapor—a potent greenhouse gas. Since 1970, global atmospheric humidity has increased by ~4% due to ocean warming, as reported by NOAA. Over the Southern Ocean, where Argo and SOCCOM floats operate, relative humidity averages 80–90% due to cold, moist conditions. In tropical regions, humidity can exceed 90% during monsoon seasons, driven by SSTs above 28°C. Argo's salinity measurements help model the water cycle, as salinity changes reflect evaporation and precipitation patterns. For example, high salinity in the subtropical Atlantic (36–37 psu) indicates strong evaporation, increasing local humidity.

    ## Data Sources and Integration
    Temperature and humidity data are integrated from Argo, WOD, and GOOS. Argo floats provide high-resolution temperature profiles (accuracy ±0.002°C), while WOD compiles historical SST data from 1880 to present. GOOS and NOAA provide atmospheric humidity data from buoys and satellite observations, linking ocean-atmosphere interactions. These datasets are visualized via Ocean Data View, showing SST and humidity trends over decades. The SOCCOM project enhances Argo data with biogeochemical sensors, measuring pH and oxygen, which indirectly inform humidity-driven acidification processes.

================================================================================

